295.00
Price
All Right Reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic or mechanical , including photocopy , recording or any information storage and retrieval system , without written permission from the publisher .
Writers
Disclaimer : Despite having taken all possible precautions during editing / proofing to make this book free from error / s , but it may be possible that some may be left . Reader's discretion is required .
Jai Hind Press , Patna - 800020_kiran
* Printed at
Attention
Every genuine copy of this book has a 3 - D Hologram on the cover . Scratch lower part of the Hologram , Lucent Publication ( in Green colour ) will appear . Decode , QR Code printed on the middle of the Hologram with Sure Assure ( Mobile App ) to verify the genuineness of the Book .
Decoding by Sure Assure mobile App , the following message will on your mobile screen
appear
Company Name : Lucent Publication
: info@lucentpublication.com : http://www.lucentpublication.com
Email
Website
: +919934016609
Mobile Address
: New Bypass Road , Ashochak , Patna , Bihar - 800 030
General Knowledge
ด เา
oin on Telegram @apna channels

1. Indian History ,
2. Geography ,
3. Indian Polity and Constitution ,
4. Indian Economy , 5. General Science and 6. Miscellany . @apna kire by well - informed persons and specialist of the
Each section of the book has been compiled with
subject matter . We are quite confident that this book will cater to the needs of a wide range of readers . Despite having taken all care , some printing errors might be there in the book . Hence valuable suggestions and comments of the readers , teachers and wellwishers are solicited . The feedback will certainly helps us in further improving the book in subsequent editions . We are thankful to our publisher who has taken great pains to bring out this book . We also express our sincere gratitude to our friends , family members and all our wellwishers for their useful suggestions , sincere support and kind co - operation .
Buddha Purnima
Writers
May 02 , 2007
Click Here To Join our Telegram Channel
Join on Telegram @apna channels

3. Geography
100
4 .
... 174-200
Introduction , I. Lithosphere , Hydrosphere & Atmosphere , II . Ecology : Study / Science of Biosphere , III . Biodiversity , IV . Environmental Issues / Problems & Their Management / Measures : Pollution , Biodiversity Loss & Climate Change . , Miscellaneous
Indian Polity and Constitution
5 .
... 201-249

1. Evolution of Indian Constitution
2. Constituent Assembly and Making of the Constitution
3. Different Sources of Indian Constitution
4. Important Parts , Articles of the Constitution 5. Schedules of Indian Constitution 6. Special Features of Indian
Join on Telegram @apna channel

6. Indian Economy
250-305

1. Highlights of Indian Economy
2. Economy and Economics
3. Characteristics of Indian Economy
4. Agriculture and Allied Sector 5. National Income 6. Economic Planning and Development 7. Unemployment and Employment 8. New Economic Policy and Reforms 9. Indian Financial System 10. Indian Fiscal System 11. Money , Banking and Insurance in India 12. Tax System 13. Industry14 . Industrial Performance 15. Trade and Commerce 16. Some Noteworthy Facts and Definitions 17. Some Economic and Financial Terms 18. Miscellaneous
Art and Culture
... 306–329

1. Architecture
2. Sculpture
3. Painting
4. Festivals and Fairs 8. Physics
330-356

1. Unit and Dimension
2. Motion
3. Work , Energy and Power
4. Gravitation 5. Pressure 6. Floatation 7. Surface Tension 8. Viscosity 9. Elasticity 10. Simple Harmonic Motion 11. Wave 12. Sound Wave 13. Heat 14. Light 15. Static Electricity 16. Current Electricity 17. Magnetism 18. Atomic & Nuclear Physics 19. Electronics 20. Scientific Instruments 21. Inventions 22. Important Discoveries in Physics 23. SL . Units of Physical Quantity 24. Conversion of Units from One System to Another ..System

9. Chemistry
357-389
1. Introduction
2. Chemical Symbol Formula and Equation
3. Atomic Structur
4. Periodic classification of Elements 5. Chemical Bonding 6. Oxidation & Reduction 7. Solution 8. Acids , Bases & Salts 9. Behaviour of Gases & Energetics 10. Energetics ( Thermodynamics ) 11. Electrolysis 12. Carbon and its Compounds 13. Fuels 14. Metallurgy 15. Important Facts About Soine Metals 16. Non metal 17. Common Facts 18. Man made substances
FOO

10. Biology
390-429

1. Introduction
2. What is living ?
3. Classification of Organism
4. Study of Cell - Cytology 5. Genetics 6. Sex Determination in Human 7. Organic Evolution BOTANY :
1. Classification of Plantae
2. Plant Morphology
3. Plant Tissue
4. Photosynthesis 5. Plant Hormones 6. Plant Diseases 7. Ecology 8. Nitrogen cycle 9. Pollution ZOOLOGY :
1. Classification of Animal Kingdom
2. Animal Tissue - 3 . Human Blood
4. System of the Human Body ? 5. Nutrients 6. Human Diseases 7. Miscellaneous 11 Miscellany
( 0 )
430-187 .
1. Firsts in India
2. Firsts in India ( Male )
3. Firsts in India ( Female )
4. Firsts in the World ( Male , Female etc. ) 5. Superlatives ( India ) 6. Superlatives ( World ) 7. Important Monuments / Structures ( World ) 8. National Emblems of Some Countries 9. National Animals of Some Countries 10. Parliaments of Some Countries 11. Some Important Signs or Symbols 12. Some Official Books ( World ) 13. Newspapers & Place of Publication ( World ) 14. United Nations 15. World Organisations and their Headquarters 16. Secretary Generals of UNO and their Tenure 17. United Nations International Weeks 18. International Years 19. Important Days ( India and World ) 20. UNESCO's World Heritage Sites ( India ) 21. Famous Tourist Spots of India 22. Defence of India 23. Internal Security of India 24. Defence Training Institutions of India 25. Foundation Day of Some States . 26. Research Centres of India 27. Nuclear And Space Research Centres in India 28. Health and Medicinal Research Centres in India 29. National Parks ( Established after 1998 ) 30. Famous Musical Instruments and their Exponents 31. Important Classical Dances And Artists 32. States and their Folk Dances 33. Cultural Organisations in India 34. Places Associated with Eminent Persons ( World ) 35. Crematorium of Famous Persons ( India ) 36. Famous Nicknames of Eminent Persons 37. Some Great Works of Famous Persons 38. Awards and Honours 39. Padma Awards 40. Gallantry Awards 41. Recipients of the Bharatiya Jnanpith Award 42. Recipients of Dada Saheb Phalke Award 43. Nobel Prize 44. Oscar / Academy Award ( Motion - Picture Award ) 45. Grammy Award ( American Music Award ) 46. Booker Prize ( British Literary Award ) 47. Ramon Magsaysay Award , 48. Gandhi Peace Prize 49. UNESCO Kalinga Prize 50. Important Books and Authors 51. Important . Committees ( India ) 52. Committees and Commissions 53. Youth Affairs , Games and Sports 54. Olympic Games , 55. Paralympics and Winter Olympics 56. Commonwealth Games 57. Asian Games 58. SAF Games 59. Cricket 60. Football 61. Hockey 62. Some Important Facts 63. Cups and Trophies 64. Famous Stadia and Sports 65. National Games and Sports ( World ) 66. Court or Field Associated with Sports 67. Number of Players in Some Popular Sports : 68. Nicknames of Eminent Players 69. Eminent Sportspersons ( India ) 70. Eminent International Players ( Female ) 71. Eminent International Players ( Male ) 72. Special Awards in Sports 73. Miscellaneous

12. Computer
488-198
Introduction , Five Generations of Computer , Programming Languages of different generations , Some Important Facts related to Computers , Units of Data Measurement , Important Keyboard Shortcuts ( Commands ) , Glossary , Abbreviations associated with Computer , Some Memorable Facts , Some Important Initiatives of the Government ,
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Development - sequence of Gregorian Calendar :
Julian Calendar
( introduced in 46 BC by Roman King Julius Caesar )
1 AD - 1000 AD - 1001 AD - 2000 AD
Christian Calendar
Important Eras
( introduced in 527 AD by Monk Dionysius Exiguus )
Nanic of Reckoned koned the Era from Kall
Remarks
** 3102/3101 began20years aftertheend of Mahabharata BBC War . Saptarshi / : 3077/3076 started after the expiry of 25 Kali year . Laukika BC
Gregorian Calendar
( introduced in 1582 AD by Roman Pope Gregory - XIII ) Gregorian Calendar is modified form of Christian Calendar and Christian Calendar is modified form of Julian Calendar . It means these Calendars are loosely synonyms to one other .
544 BC To commemorate the parinirvana of Budda
Buddhist

527.BC To commemorate the parinirvana of
Jain
Era ( English ) = Samvata ( Sanskrit ) = San ( Arabic ) The eras , except Vikrama , Saka and Hijri era , are either vanished in course of time or still in use in specific regions .
2 .
Mahavir
3 .
Vikrama / 58/57 BC commenced by Vikramaditya , the local Krita /
kingofUjjayini ( Malawa ) , to commemorate the victory over the Sakas . commenced by Kushan ruler Kanishka , _ on the occasion of his ascendence to the throne . Saka era is known as Salivahana Sakabda in South India . The Government of India adopted Saka Era along with the
Malawa Saka

4. National Calendar : Saka Samvata is used in some government sectors customarily ( officially ) , where as Gregorian Calendar is used everywhere practically . 5. Every religion / region has his own calender ( esp for religious / regional festivals & fairs ) ·
78 AD
kir
Gregorian Calendar ( i.e. Julean Calendar / Christian Calendar ) as National Calendar on 22 March , 1957 ( 1ª Chaitra 1879 Saka ) . founded by Abhir king Ishwar Sen , later on used by Traikutaka ruler and Kalchuris of Chedi . 319-20 AD founded by Gupta ruler Chandragupta - I , on the occasion of his ascendence to the throne . After the fall of the Guptas , the Maitrakas of Valabhi used this era with a new name Valabhi Samvata . The begin- ning of Gupta era was fixed by J.F.Fleet in 1887 AD ..
Conversion of Eras : With the help of above mentioned table , any era can be converted into other era . Conversion of AD of Christian era in Vikrama era : conversion of AD era in Vikrama era , 57 is added to AD . e.g. Convert 2013 AD into Vikrama era .
For
Kalchuri 248 AD 248 AD .
Vikrama
Gupta
2013 + 57 = 2070
Conversion of Vikrama era into AD era : To find AD era from Vikrama era , 57 is subtracted from Vikrama era . e.g. Convert 2070 Vikrama era into AD era .
. ་ ་
Vikrama
2070 57 = 2013
Banga / 593 ADTo mark the ascent of Shashanka , ruler of
Conversion of AD era into Saka era : To get Saka era from AD era , 78 is subtracted from AD . e.g. Convert 2013 AD into Saka era .
་་་
Bengal
Bengali Harsha
606 AD · founded by Harshavardhana of Kannauj , to pronounce his ascendence to the throne . 622 AD founded by Umar , the second Caliphate of Khilafat empire , to commemorate the hijrat from Macca to Madina by Hazrat Muhammad .
Saka
lijri
2013 78 = ' 1935
Conversion of Saka era into AD era : To find equivalent AD era from Saka era , 78 is added to Saka era . e.g. Convert 1935 Saka era into AD era .
Kollam Nevari / Nepali Chalukya - 1076 AD founded by Vikramaditya - VI , the Vikrama Chalukya ruler of Kalyani , on the occasion of his ascedence to the throne . an era that is in use in Malabar ( Kerala ) . founded by Jaydeo Mall . Lakshmana 1119 AD founded by Sen ruler of Bengal Laksh mana Sen
825 AD 879 AD
AD .
Saka
1935 +78 2013
Conversion of AD of Christian era into Hijri era To calculate Hijri era from AD of Christian following formula ( C - 622 ) × 33 33 = ... H is used . e.g. Convert 2013 AD of Christian era into Hijri era . ( 2013-622 ) × 33 = 1434 H
the
era ,
1469 ADTo commemorate the birth of Guru Nanak
Nanakchahi
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Historical Sources
The sources that give information about the events of past time are known as ' Historical Sources ' . " There are two types of historical sources - Literary Sources and Archaeological Sources . Compared to Literary sources Archeological sources are believed to be more reliable , because it is almost impossible . to change them . That's why , as historical evidence , the archaeological sources take precedence over the . literary sources . The Archeological sources are more important to the study of Ancient India .
Historic : 600 BC- Period
till date
Chronology
German historian Christoph Cellarius ( 1638-1707 AD ) was the first historian who gave us tripartite division of History . He divided history into three periods - Ancient , Medieval and Modern History . After him , this tripartite division became standard ( model ) for history - writting or reading . For convenience to study , Indian History is divided into four periods― Ancient India the beginning - 647 AD i.e. from Lithic ( Stone ) Period to death of Harsha
I. Literary Sources .
Literary sources are divided into two categories- Indigenous and Foreign .
A. Indigenous Sources
Medieval India 647–1757 ja
i.e. from death of Harsha to the Battle of Plassey
Indigenous sources are divided into two categories = Religious and Secular . Under Religious texts Brahmanic ( Hindu ) texts , Buddhist texts and Jain texts are included . Under Secular texts Historical texts , Semi - Historical . texts , Biographical texts etc are included . Brahmanic ( Hindu ) Texts
Modern India 1757-1990
i.e. from the Battle of Plassey to Globlization
Post modern . 1991 - till date India
i.e. from Globalization to till date
Ancient India : the Beginning 647 AD _____
Under Brahmanic ( Hindu ) texts Shruti & Smriti texts are included .
Pre - Historic Period
30,00,000 BC - 600 BC : 2,500 BC - 1750 BC 1,500 BC - 600 BC
- :
Indus Civilization
Shruti Texts : Samhitas or Vedas , Brahmanas , Aranyakas & Upanishadas . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Vedic Culture Mahajanapada Period
1 .
600 BC - 322.BC

1. Till date 40 Ashokan inscriptions have been found .
2. In Ashokan inscriptions only Karuwaki among his queens and only Teevar among his children have been
mentioned .

3. In Ashokan inscriptions . the word ' Pasand for Sampradaya i.e. community , ' Bambhan ' for Brahmana and ' Nigrath ' for Nirgranth i.e. Jain have used . 14. Bhabru inscription is the only Ashokan inscription in which Boustrophendon ( Bailmutti i.e. writing likè piss of an ox ) scriptis used . This script is a bidirectional script .e . from right to left and left to right in alternate line . 5 In Yerragudi inscription ( Andhra Pradesh ) the matter of inscription is written in Brahmi script but right to left ☐ ( Note - Brahmi script is written from left to right direction only ) . 6 In four Ashokan inscriptions found from Maski , Gurjara , Nittur & Udegolam , the word ' Ashoka ' is used for him . 7 Bhabru inscription is the only Ashokan inscription in which Mauryanking Ashokacalled himself'Magadhiraj i.e. Raja of Magadh . 8. Ashokan Junagadh ( Gimnar ) Major Rock Edict is the inscription on which later Saka ruler Rudradaman ( 130-50 AD ) and Gupta ruler Skandagupta ( 455-67 AD ) inscribed their inscriptions .
Greeks .
Dhanadeo's Ayodhya Stone Inscription ( 1st Century BC ) : It is encarved on a stone - piece which is 1 km away from Ayodhyanagar in Basti district of Uttar Pradesh state . It is written in Sanskrit language and Brahmi script . It is the earliest available inscription written in Sanskrit language . This was inscribed by Dhanadeo of Shung dynasty . It contains the information about Pushyamitra Shung , founder of Shung dynasty , their capital Ayodhya , Ashwamedha Yajnas performed twice by him , victory over the Greek etc. > Kharavela's Hathigumpha Inscription ( 1st Century BC ) : This inscription is inscribed on the upper part of Hathigumpha ( Ġumpha is an Odeshi synonym of Hindi word Gupha i.e cave ) . It was inscribed by Kharavela , the Cheti / Chedi or Mahameghavahan ruler of Kalinga . It is written in Prakrit language and Brahmi script . It throws light on the life of Kharavela , his acts and the events of his reign year by year ( from coronation Ashokan Allahabad Pillar Edict is the inscription on apna_kizor 13 years of his rule ) . It described the Kalinga ruler
which the inscription of four persons are inscribed- Ashoka , Karuwaki , Samudragupta & Jehangir .. 10. The first discovered inscription of Ashoka is Meerut- Delhi Pillar Edict which was discovered in 1750 AD by . Joseph Tiefenthaler an European Jesuit Missionary & Geographer .
Kharavela and his queen as the patron of Jain religion . Kharavela was a follower of Jain religion and he took up the title ' Bhikshuraj ' . This inscription describes how he invaded Magadh and made their king Brihaspatimitra ( Shung dynasty ) pay homage at his feet . He returned home ( i.e. Kalinga ) with the statue and the foot - marks of the first Jina ( i.e. Rishabhadeva ) which had been carried away three centuries ago by king Nanda . The important points among other details of the inscription are- Extension of the old canal ( excavated by king Nanda ) up to the capital Kalinga from Tanasuliya ; Construction of Mahavijaya palace ; Construction of a large temple at . Bhubaneshwar etc. In this inscription he called himself ' Chakravarti ' ruler . This is the first inscription in which the word ' Bharatvarsha ' is mentioned . Nagagnika's Nanaghat Cave Inscription ( Second half of 1st Century BC ) : This inscription is found from a cave . of Nanaghat in Poona ( Pune ) district of Maharashtra state . It is written in Prakrit language and Brahmi script . It was inscribed by Satavahana ruler Shatakarni's wife Nagagnika who was a daughter of Maharathi of Maharashtra . It throws light on the achievements of Shatakarni ( 20 BC ... ) . In this Inscription Shatakarni is called ' Apratihatchakra ' ‘ Dakshinadhipati ' , ' Dhan of Simuk Vansha ' etc. It mentions Yajnas ( i.e sacrifices ) — Ashwamedha Yajna ( 2 times ) , Rajasuya Yajna , Agnadheya Yajna etc - performed by Shatakarni . It contains the information that at the time of death of . Shatakarni both his sons - Shaktishri & Vedashri - were minor , so their mother Nagagnika held the power in · her hand as regent .
Ashokan inscriptions are generally written in Brahmi script and Prakrit language . 12 Though Prakrit was the language used in Ashokan inscription , the script varied from region to region Brahmi script in Eastern India , Kharosthi script in North - Western India and Greek & Aramaik scripts in Western India .
In Manshera & Shahbajgadhi ( both in Pakistan ) Inscription Kharosthi script ( Script that is written from bright to left ) is used .
13 .
In Shara - i - Kuna ( Kandhar , Afghanistan ) Inscription : Greek & Aramaik script is used . Devdatta Ramkrishna ( D.R. ) Bhandarkar has written a book ' Ashoka ' ( Published in 1925 AD ) which is based only on the inscriptions of Ashoka . Dasharatha's Nagarjuni Cave Inscription ( 220 BC ) : This inscription is found in Nagarjuni hills situated in Jehanabad district of Bihar state . This inscription is written in Prakrit | language and Brahmi script . According to the inscription , | king Dasharatha ( grandson of Ashoka ) donated three caves namely Vapika , Gopika & Vadithika cave to Ajivika monks so that they could reside in the rainy season .
14 .
15 .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Megalith Culture of South India : 1,000 BC - 100 AD > Although megalith graves or memorials are found in South India along with North India & Vidarbha , but when in Indian History we say Megalith Culture ' then it has general meaning - Megalith Culture of South India . > The English word ' Megalith ' is the combination of two Greek words Mega ( = Huge ) and Lith ( = Stone ) . Thus the meaning of Megalith in present context is— Graves or memorials made from large pieces of stone . Megaliths were made either as a graves for burying the dead person or as a memorial to commemorate the dead person . Since Megalith is the specific identity of this culture therefore this culture was named Megalith Culture ' . In 1851 & 1862 Colonel Meadows Taylor published the descriptions of the excavations of Megalith graves / memorials of Shorapur doab situated in Gulbarga ' district of Karnataka state . ➤ Archaeologist Alexander Rea excavated two megalith sites Adichchannalur situated on the bank of Tamrapari river in Tirunelavely district of Tamil Nadu during 1889 to 1905 and Perumbur during 1904 to 1908 . In 1947 archaeologist Mortimer Wheeler excavated Brahmagiri situated in Chitradurg district of Karnataka
( a ) Menhir In such type of grave / memorial , a large stone of column size is erected on the grave . The length of such stone is more than 1.5 meter . In local language , Menhir is called ' Nadu - Kal ' . Such types of graves / memorials are found in the regions of Maski and Gulbarga . ( b ) Hood Stone : In such type of grave / memorial , a round shaped stone obversely placed on the grave . Such types of grave / memorial looks like a hood of the snake , therefore it is named ' Hood Stone ' . In local language of South India , Hood Stone is called ' Kudai Kal ' . Such type of graves / memorials are found in Andhra Pradesh and Kerala . ( c ) Umbrella Stone : In such type of grave / memorial , a large stone of column size is erected on the grave and then kira upon this an umbrella - shaped stone is placed . Since such
state .
Important Sites of Megalith Culture State Archicological Sites , Andhra Situated in Guntur district - Nagarjunikonda ; Pradesh Situated in Kurnul district - Singanpalli ;. Situated in Ananatpur district - Palvai Karnataka Situated in Raichur district — Masks & Piklihal ,
Situated in Bellary district — Sangankallu & T.Narsipur , Situated in Chitradurg district - Brahmagiri : Situated in Trichur district - Porkalam ; Situated in Kochindistrict - Ariyannur ; Cheramangarh & Kattakampal Situated in Chingelpattu district - Chingelpattu , Sanur & Amritmangalam ; Situated in Kanchipuram district - Sengunaram ; Situated in North Arcot district - Paiyyampalli ; Situated in Tirunelveli district Korkai & Adichchannallur Characteristics of Megalith Culture The chief characteristics of Megalith culture are as follows :
type of grave / memorial looks like an umbrella from a long distance , therefore it is named ' Umbrella Stone ' . In local language of South India Umbrella Stone is called ' Topi - Kal ' . Such types of graves / memorials are found in Ariyannur and Chermangarh in Kerala state . ( d ) Dolmen Dolmen is a word of Keltic language . Dolmen means ' Table of Stone ' . Since such type of grave / memorial looks like a rectangular stone table from a long distance , therefore it is named ' Dolmen ' . The examples of dolmen are found in Brahmagiri of Karnataka and Chingelpattu of Tamil Nadu . ( e ) Cairn Circle : In such type of grave / memorial , the pieces of stones are set in circular shape around the grave . Since such type of grave / memorial looks like a circular ring of stones , therefore it is named ' Cairn Circle ' . In Tamil language Cairn Circle is called ' Nidai Kal Teddi ' . Such type of graves / memorials are found in Chingelpattu of Tamil Nadu . ( f ) Rock - cut Caves : In the making of such type of grave / memorial , firstly laterite rocks of hills are cut in the form of a cave and after that the corpse of the dead person is placed in the cave and finally the mouth of the cave is closed . It is called ' Tadi ' cave . Such types of graves / memorials are found in Kattakampal of Cochin district and Porkalam of Trichur district of Kerala .
Kerala
Tamil Nadu
Burial Practices
In megalith culture , there were two types of burial practices Fractional / Partial & Complete / Extensive burial practices . Fractional / Partial Burial Practice : Under fractional burial practice , the selected bones of dead person were buried in the grave . It seems that they left the dead person in open space vere the fleshes of dead person were eaten by birds and animals , and after that the remaining bones were selected and placed in the grave . This burial practice ´was very prevalent in Megalith Culture .
Complete / Extensive Burlal Practice : In some places like Nagarjunikonda , Maski , Adichchannallur etc the examples of complete burials are found . In complete burial practice , the dead persons were placed in East - West order ( f.e.head towards the East and feet towards the West ) . Under
Potteries
The black red wares are found from almost every grave / memorial sites and welling places of Megalith Culture
of South India .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Harappan / Indus Civilization ( 2500 BC - 1750 BC )
Baluchistan , Punjab , Haryana , Rajasthan , Gujarat , Western U.P : and Northern Maharashtra . Scholars generally believe that Harappa - Ghaggar- Mohenjodaro axis represents the heartland of the Indus Civilization . The Northern most site of Indus Civilization - Ropar ( Sutlej ) / Punjab ( Earlier ) ; Manda ( Chenab ) / Jammu- Kashmir ( Now ) . The Southem most site of Indus Civilization - Bhagatrav ( Kim ) / Gujarat ( Earlier ) ; Daimabad ( Pravara ) /
The oldest name - Indus Civilization . According to archaeological tradition , the most appropriate name - Harappan Civilization ( Harappa was the first site from where a city buried under earth was discovered ) . > British historian A.J. Toynbee called Indus civilization as ' Indic civilization ' .
Σ . According to the geographical point of view , the most suitable name - Indus - Saraswati Civilization ( the largest concentration of settlement - along the Indus - Saraswati river valley ; 80 % settlement along the Saraswati ) . The most accepted period - 2500 BC - 1750 BC ( by Carbon - 14 dating ) . > John Marshall was the first scholar to use the term ‘ Indus Civilization ' . ➤ The Indus Civilization belongs to Proto - Historic Period ( Chalcolithic Age / Bronze Age ) .
Maharashtra ( Now ) .
The Eastern most site of Indus Civilization— Alamgirpur ( Hindon ) / Uttar Pradesh .
The Western most site of Indus Civilization Sutkagendor ( Dashk ) / Makran Coast ( Pakistan - Iran Border ) . Capital Cities - Harappa , Mohenjodaro Port Cities - Lothal , Sutkagendor , Allahdino , Balakot , Kuntasi Join on Telegram @apna_channels
The Indus Civilization was spread over Sindh ,

3. Underground drainage system ( giant water reservoirs in Dholavira )
༈ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་ ་་་
A NA NA NA MALĀ MALĀKA JA SAM S
T ↓

1. Vedangas / Sutras

2. Smritis Dharmashastras
Shilpveda / Arthaveda le . the science Atharva Veda : of craft / wealth ( Vishwakarma ) Note : According to Sushrut , Ayurveda is associated with Atharva Veda . Among Nastik Darshanas . There are 9 schools of Indian philosophy known as Nav- Darshanas . In which 6 darshanas are Aastik Darshan : ( Darshans which accepts the Vedas as authoritative sourceofknowledge ) and3 darshanasare NastikDarshan ( darshan which rejects the Vedas as authoritative source of knowledge ) . Lokayat Mat / Charvaka / Lokayat Mat is the earliest Darshana . Shad - Darshanas ( Aastik Darshanas )

3. Mahakavyas ( Epics )
4. Puranas 5. Upvedas There are six Vedangas :

6. Shad - Dharshanas .

1. Shiksha ( Phonetics ) : " Pratishakhya - the oldest text on phonetics .
2. Kalpa Sutras ( Rituals ) ( a ) Shrauta Sutras / Shulva Sutras - deal with the sacrifices , ( b ) Grihya Sutras - deal with family ceremonies , ( c ) Dharma Sutras - deal with Vamas ; Ashramas etc.
3. Vyakarana ( Grammar ) : " Ashtadhyayi ' ( Panini ) —the oldest grammar of the world .
4. Nirukta ( Etymology ) : Nirukta ' ( Yask ) based on Nighantu ' ( Kashyap ) -a.collection of difficult vedic words ( Nighantu ' - the oldest word - collection of the
Darshanas i.e. Vaedik
Founders Kapila Patanjali
Darshana 1 Sankhya Darshana 2 Yoga Darshana
Basic Text Sankhya Sutra
74 ry
inta )
world ; Nirukta ' - the oldest dictionary of the world ) a_kiran 5. Chhanda ( Metrics ) : ' Chhandasutras ' ( Pingal ) —famous text . 6. Jyotisha ( Astronomy ) : Vedanga Jyotisha ' ( Lagadh Muni ) the oldest Jyotisha text . There are six famous Smritis : ( a ) Manu Smriti ( Pre - Gupta Period ) -the oldest Smriti text ; Commentators : Vishwarupa , Meghatithi , Gobindraj , * Kulluk Bhatt . ( b ) YajnvalkyaSmriti ( Pre - Gupta Period ) Commentators : Vishwarupa , Jimutvahan ( Daybhag ) , Vijnyaneshwar ( Mitakshara ) , Apararka ( a king of Shilahar Dynasty ) ( c ) Narad Smriti ( Gupta period ) , ( d ) Parashara Smriti ( Gupta period ) , …… . ( e ) Brihaspati Smriti ( Gupta period ) , ( f ) Katyayana Smriti ( Gupta period ) . There are mainly two Mahakavyas ( Epics ) :
1. The Ramayana ( Valmiki ) : It is known as ‘ Adi Kavya ' ( the oldest epic of the world ) . At present , it consists of 24,000 shlokas i.e. verses ( Originally 6,000 , Later - 12,000 , Finally - 24,000 ) in 7 Kandas i.e. sections . 1st and 7th Kandas were the latest additions to the Ramayana . The Mahabharata ( Ved Vyasa ) : The longest epic of the world . At present , it consists of 1,00,000 shlokas i.e. verses ( Originally - 8,800 - Jay Samhita , Later - 24,000- Chaturvinshati Sahastri Samhita / Bharata , Finally- 1,00,000 - Shatasahastri Samhita / Maha Bharata ) in 18 Parvans i.e. chapters , plus the Harivamsa supplement . Bhagavad Gita is extracted from Bihshma Parvan of Mahabharata . Shanti Parvan is the largest parvan ( chapter ) of the Mahabarata .
Yoga Sutra
Naya Darshan Nayaya Sutra
Akshapada Gautama Uluka Kanadaj
Vaishesika Darshana Vaishesika Sutra
Purva Mimansa Sutra Jaimini
Mimansa / Purva - Mimansa
BrahmaSutra / Vedant Badarayana
Vedant / Uttara
Sutra
Mimansa
Trik - Darshanas ( Nastik Darshanas i.e. Avaidik
Darshanas )
Founder
S. Darshana Basic Text LokayatMat / Brihaspati Charvaka Sutra Jain Aagam Granth
Original Founder - Brihaspati Real Founder Charvaka Mahavir Swami
Tripitaka
Buddhism
Mahatma Buddh
Rig Vedic / Early Vedic Period ( 1500 BC - 1000 BC ) Geographical Area
➤ Rig Veda is the only source of knowledge for this period . From the names of rivers , mountains ( Himvant ie . Himalaya , Munjavanti.e . Hindukush ) and ocean in Rig Veda we have a clear idea of the geographical area in which Rigvedic people lived . Rig Veda mentions 40 rivers . The Nadisukta hymn of the Rig Veda mentions 21 rivers which include the Ganges in the east and the Kubha ( Kabul ) in the west . > Rigvedic people , who called themselves Aryans were confined in the area which came to be known as Sapta Sindhu i.e. land of the seven rivers . Sapta Sindhu comprises Sindhu and their five tributaries - Vitasta , Asikani , Vipas , Parushni & Sutuadrland Saraswatt
Join on Telegram @apna_chann
channels

1. Garbhadhana
2. Pumsavana
3. Simantonnayan
4. Jatakarma 6. Nishkramana

5. Namakaran .

7. Annaprashana 8. Chudakarma 9. Karachhedana 10. Vidyarmbha 11. Upanayana 12. Vedarambha 13. Samavaratana 14. Vivaha 15. Vanprastha 16. Antyesti Religion > The earlier divinities Indra and Agni were relegated to . the background while Prajapati ( creator of the Universe , later known as Brahma ) , Vishnu ( Patron god of Aryaris ) and Rudra ( God of animals , later identified with Shiva / Mahesha ) rose in prominence . Now Prajapati became the supreme God . > Pushana , who protected cattle in the early Vedic Period now became the god of Shudras . > Brihadaranyaka Upanishada was first the work to give the doctrine of transmigration ( Punarjanma / Samsara- chakra ) and deeds ( Karma ) .
Society
> As time passed by Yajnas became elaborate and complicated ceremonies leading to the emergence of learned men known as Brahmanas . And as the Aryans expanded to the east and south , a group of people known as Kshatriyas emerged to conquer territories and administer them . The remaining Aryans formed a separate class known as Vaishyas , a word derived from Vis meaning ' people ' . The non- Aryan formed the fourth class known as Shudras . Neverthless , these divisons of society were not rigid . The institution of Gotra i.e. the clan appeared in later Vedic Period . > The higher castes could marry with the lower ones , but marriage with shudras was not permitted . The idea of pollution appeared in society .
ALPurohita Mahishi 3.Yuvaraja Suta / Sarathi . 5 : Senani 6. Gramani 7 Kshata Sangrahitri Bhagadudha 10 Akshavapa 11. Palagala 12. Govikarta
the Priest
the Queen Crown prince
> The earliest reference to the 4 Ashramas ( the stages of life ) Brahmacharya , Grihastha , Vanprastha and Sanyasa - is found in the Jabala Upanishad . The Ashrama
the Royal herald / the Charioteer
system was formed to attain 4 Purusharthas ( Dharmana_kiran
the General . Head of the village . Gaterian / Chamberlain
Artha , Kama and Moksha ) .
> The status of women declined . According to Aitareya Brahamana a daughter is the sources of misery but a son is the protector of family . According to Maitrayani Samhita there are three evils- liquor , woman and dice . > Though monogamy ( a man having one wife ) was the ideal but polygamy ( a man having more than one wife ) was frequent .
Treasurer
Collector of taxes :
Courier
Friend of King Head of forest department
The early simple ceremony of Rigvedic Period gave place to elaborate sacrifices requiring the services of as many as 17 priests . In the later Vedas and Brahamanas sacrifices ( Yajnas ) came into prominence . There were two varieties of sacrifices- Laghuyajnas ( Simple / Private Sacrifices ) : Performed by householder e.g. Pancha Mahayajna , Agnihotra , Darsha Yajna ( on Amavasya Le , on the last day of the dark fortnight ) , Purnamasa Yajna ( on Purnima i.e. on the day of full moon ) etc.
2. Mahayajnas ( Grand / Royal Sacrifices ) : Sacrifices that could only be undertaken by an aristocratic and wealthy man and the king , ( a ) Rajasuya Yajna : Royalconsecration , which in its full form comprised a series of sacrifices lasting over . a year . In later days it was replaced by simplified : Abhisheka i.e , anointment .
Women were prohibited from attending political assemblies . ➤ Yajnavalkya - Gargi dialogue ( Vrihadarnyaka Upanis- hada ) indicates that some women had got higher education . Types of Hindu Marriage ( Vivaha ) ****
Brahma Vivaha
Giving the girl to a man with dowry ... Giving the girl to the priest himself in lieu of his fees . Giving the girl to a man after accepting a bride - price .
Daiva Vivaha
Arsha Vivaha
Prajapatya Vivaha Giving the girl demanding a bride price .
man without
AH'S A
Gandharva Vivaha By free mutal choice or Love marriage .
Marriage with a purchased girl . Rakshasa Vivaha Marriage with the daughter of defeated king or with a kidnapped gir Palshacha Vivaha Marriage to a girl after , seducing or raping her
Asura Vivahaa
( b ) Vajapeya Yaina : Drink of strength , which lasted for a period of seventeen days upto full one year . ( c ) Asyamedha Yama - Horse sacrifice , which lasted . for three day
: ་
annel
oin

5.1 . Mahajanapada Period ( 600 BC - 325 BC ) na_kiran
16dlahájenapadas ( fedem Area )
Capital
Anga ( districts of Munger and Champa / Champanagar Bhagalpur in Bihar )

2. Magadha lay at the centre of the middle Gangetic plain . The alluvium , once cleared of the jungles , proved immense fertile and food surplus was thus available .
3. Magadha enjoyed a special advantage in military organisation . Although the Indian states were well acquainted with the use of horses and chariots , it was Magadha which first used elephants on a large scale in its war against its neighbours .
Girivraj , Rajgriha / Rajgir
Magadha
( districts of Patna , Gaya & Nalanda ( Bimbisara ) , Patliputra in Bihar )
( Udayin ) , Vaishali ( Shishunaga ) , Patliputra ( Kalashok )
Vai ( districts of Muzaffarpur & Videha , Mithila , Vaishali Vaishali in Bihar ) : talla ( districts of Deoria , Basti , Kushinara and Pawa Gorakhpur & Siddharthnagar in
© Haryanaka Dynasty : 544 BC - 412 BC Bimbisara ( Shronika ) : 544 BC - 492 BC He was the founder of Haryanka dynasty . > Magadha came into prominence under the leadership of Bimbisara .
U.P. )
✓ . I ,
Kashi ( district of Varanasi in U.P. ) Varanasi Kosala ( districts of Faizabad , North
Kosal - Sravasti / Sahet - Mahet South Kosal Saket / Ayodhya
Ganda , Bahraich in U.P. ) .
079126
Vatsa ( districts of Allahabad , Kausambi
He was a contemporary of Gautama Buddha . He married the princesses of Kosala ( Kosaldevi Mahakosala - daughter of Kosal King Prasenjit ) , Lichchhavi ( Chellana sister of Lichchhavi , Head Chetaka ) and Madra ( Khema - daughter of Madra king ) , which helped him in his expansionist policy . He gained a part of Kashlas dowry in his marriage with the sister of king Prasenjit of Kosala .
Mirzapur in U.P. ) :
Shaktimati / Sotthivati
Chedi ( Bundelkhand area )
Indraprastha ( modem Delhi )
Kuru ( Haryana and Delhi area )
Panchala ( Ruhelkhand , Westem North Panchal - Ahichhatra
South Panchal - Kampilya
UP . )

3.Shurasena ( Brajmandal )
Mathura
12 Matsya ( Alwar , Bharatpur & Jaipur Viratnagar
in Rajasthan ) :
North Avant - Ujjayini
➤ He conquered Anga
anti ( Malwa )
South Avanti Mahishmati
He sent a royal physician , Jivaka to Ujjain , when Avant King Pradyota was suffered from jaundice . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
( between the rivers Potana / Patali armada and Godavari )

3. Sambhamath
4. Abhiaandam 5. Sumatinath 6. Padmaprabhu 7 Suparswanath 8 : Chandraji Prabhu Prabhu 9. Suvidhinath 10. Shitalnath 11 Shreganath
Horse
Monkey Curlew Red Lotus Swastik Moon Crocodile Srivatsa . Rhinoceros Buffalo Boar Falcon * Vajra Deer He - Goat Fish Waterpot Tortoise Blue Lotus Conch Shell Serpent & Lion ⠀
༄་ , "

12. Vasupujya 13. Vimalnath 14. Anantnath 15 : Dharmanath 16. Shantinath 17. Kuntunath 18. Amath 19. Mallinath 20. Muniswasth 21 : Neminath 122 Arishtanemi 23. Parshwanath 24 Mahavira Note : Thirthankaras Rishavadev Neminath Parshwanath Mahavir Mahavira's Life
( Gandhara school of sculpture ) , astronomy , coinageetha_kiran
3. The invasion opened the eyes of Indian politicians to the necessity of creating a unified empire .
4. The date of the invasion of Alexander is the ' first reliable . date in early Indian history ' and considerably helps us in solving problem of chronology . 5.2 . Religious Movements ( 600 BC ÷ 400 BC ) Various religious movements viz . Buddhism , Jainism etc. were born and grew up in the Post - Vedic Period known as the Period of Second Urbanisation or the Age of Buddha ( 6th Century BC to 4th Century BC ) . Causes of Religious Movements 15 The vedic philosophy had lost its original purity . The vedic religion had become very complex and had degenerated into superstitions , dogmas and rituals . Tired of such things , people were looking for a religion simple in form , easy to follow and economical to practice .
Concerned Yakshinis Chakreshwari
Ambika Padmavati Siddhayika

1. agewanit
→ Mahavira was born in 540 BC in a village Kundgrama near Vaishali in Bihar . His father Siddhartha was the head of the Jnathrika Kshtriya clan under Vajji of Vaishali and his mother Trishala was the sister of Chetaka ; the king of Vaishali . Mahavira was also related to Bimbisara , the ruler of Magadha , who had married Chellana , the daughter of Chetaka . According to Shwetabar cult , Mahavira was married to Yashoda ( daughter of Samarvira king ) and produced a daughter Anonja Priyadarshini whose husband Jamall , became the first disciple of Mahavira . > At the age of 30 , after the death of his father , he renounced his family , became an ascetic and proceeded Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Supremacy of the Brahmans created unrest in the society and Kshatriyas reacted against the Brahmanical domination . Introduction of a new agricultural economy in Eastern India . 5. The desire of Vaishyas to improve their social position with the increase in their economic position due to the growth of trade . A
Jainism
According to the Jain tradition there were 24 Thirthan- karas ( literally Ford maker , across the stream of existence ) , the first being Rishabhadeva / Adinatha and the last being Mahavira .

3. Samyak Karma / Acharana ( Right action / conduct ) : It is the practice of the 5 vows of Jainism . Pancha Mahavaratas i.e. Five Vows of Jainism
Five vows of Jainism are :
1. Ahimsa ( non - injury ) 2.Satya ( non - lyingẞ.Asteya ( non - stealing ) 4.Aparigrahapna kir ( non - possession ) 5. Brahmacharya ( chastity ) . The first four vows were laid down by Parshwanath . The fifth one was added by Mahavira .
_ Bhadrabahu .
Examples of Jain Architecture

1. Gumphas i.e. Caves e.g. Hathigumpha , Baghagumpha etc. , Udaigiri and Khandagiri ( Orissa ) -Kharvela
2. Dilwara temples e.g. Vimalavasahi temple , Tejapala ☐ temple - Mount Abu ( Rajasthan ) .
3. Temples Giranar and Palitana ( Gujarat ) .
4. Temples e.g. Pavapuri temple , Rajagriha temple - Bihar 5. Statue of Gometeshwar / Bahubali - Shravanbelgola ( Karnataka ) .
Types of Knowledge
There are 5 types of knowledge :
1. Mati jnana- Perception through activity of sense organs , including the mind .
2. Shruta jnana - Knowledge . revealed by scriptures
3. Avadhi jnana - Clairvoyant perception
4. Manahparyayajnana - Telepathic knowledge5 . Keval . jnana - Temporal knowledge or Omniscience . Syadvada i.e. The Theory of Maybe / Perhaps All- Nour judgements are necessarily relative , conditional and limited . According to Syadavada seven modes of prediction ( Saptabhangi Nayavad ) are possible . " Absolute affirmation and absolute negation both are wrong . All judgements are conditional . Syadvada is also known as Anekantvada i.e. the theory of plurality or multi - sideness . The Principles of Jainism as preached by Mahavira :
1. Rejected the authority of the Vedas and vedic rituals
2. Did not believe in the existence of God .
3. Believed in Karma and the transmigration of soul
4. Laid great emphasis on equality . Jain Year Venue Chairman Patron Result Council 300 Patliputra Sthulabhadra Chand- Compilation of 12 BC . ragupta Angas
Royal Patrons I. North India :

1. Nandas ; Bimbisar , Ajatshatru and Udayin ( Haryank ) , Chandragupta Maurya , Bindusara and Samprati ( Mauryan ) Magadha

2. Pradyota ( Avanti )
3. Udayan ( Sindhu - Sauvira )
4. Kharavela ( Kalinga ) . ⠀ II . South India :
1. Ganga Dynasty
2. Kadamb Dynasty

3. Amoghavarsha ( Rashtrakuta Dynasty ) .
4. Siddharaj Jai Singh and Kumarpala ( Chaulukya / Solanki ) the last great patrons of Jainism .
Prominent Jain Scholars

1. Sudharma : 5th Century BC First Thera ( Preacher ) of Jainism , disciple of Mahavir Swami and only Ganadhar ( Commune Head ) who lived after death of Mahavir Swamil
Maurya
Final compilation of 12 Angas and 12 Upangas
512 Vallabhi Devardhi AD
Kshmas
ramana
Join on Telegram @apna
hannels

2. Bhadrababu : 4th Century BC ( Knownas'LastShrutkevali ' ( Spritual Guru , of Mauryan King Chandragupta Maurya , Founder of Digambar sect of Jainism , Major works : ' Kalpa Sutra ' , ' Bhadrabahu Samhita / Charit ' , ' Vasudeva Charit ' etc )
་ ཀ་ ་ ་ འབགས་
Bodhil tree
Nirvana / Sambodhi ( Enlightenment )
Dharmachakra pravartana ( First Sermon ) Wheel : Mahaparinirvana ( Death ) His next teacher was Udraka Ramputra .
Stupa
Sthulabhadra : First Half of 3rd Century BC ( Disciple of Bhadrabahu , Founder of Shwetambar sect of Jainism ) Siddhsen Diwakar : 5th Century AD ( Jain Philosopher , Major Works : ' Sanmatitark Sutra ' , Nyayavtar ' etc ) 5 ... Haribhadra Suri : 705-75 AD ( Jain Monk , Major Works ' Dhurtakhyan ' , ' Samaraichcha Kaha / Samaraditya Katha etc ) . 6. Hemchandra : 1088-1172 AD [ Courtier of Solanki Kings Jaisingh Siddhraj & Kumarpal , Nickname : Kalikala · Sarvajna i.e. Omniscient of Kali Age , Major Works : Trishasthishlakapurush Charit ' ' Siddh - Hemchandra Shabdanushan ' ( Grammares of Sanskrit , Parkrit & Apabhramsa ) , ' Kumarpal Charit ' ] ( a Dvyasharya Kavya i.e. a verse of two bases ( meanings ) etc ) 7. Harivijay Suri : 1526-95 AD ( a Jain Scholar who participated in religious conference held at Ibadatgah in Fatehpur Sikri , Jagat Guru ' : a title given by Mughal emperor Akbar )
At the age of 35 , under a pipal tree at Uruvella ( Bodh Gaya ) on the bank of river Niranjana ( modern name Falgu ) he attained Nirvana ( enlightenment ) after 49 days of continuous meditation ; now he was a fully enlightened ( Buddha or Tathagat ) . Buddha delivered his first sermon at Samath ( Dear park ) to his five disciples , this is known as Dharmachakra Pravartana ( Turning of the wheel of law ) . ➤ Hedied attheage of 80 in 483 BC at Kushinagar ( identical with the village Kasia in Kushinagar district of U.P. ) . This is known as Mahaparinirvana ( Final Blowing out ) . Kanthaka - Budhha's horse , Channa - Buddha's charioteer , Devadatta - Buddha's cousin , Sujata the farmer's daughter who gave him rice milk at Bodh Gaya , Other names of Buddha - Gautama ( Clan name ) , ☐ Siddharta ( Childhood name ) , Shakya Muni . Doctrine of Buddhism Chatwari Arya Satyani ( Four Noble Truths ) It is the essence of Buddhism .
1. Life is full of sorrow ( Dukha ) : Sabbam Dukkam .
2. There are causes of sorrow ( Dukha Samudaya ) Dwadash Nidan / Pratitya Samutpada .
Buddhism Buddha's Life
Gautama Buddha , founder of Buddhism , was born in 563 BC ( widely accepted ) , on the vaisakha purnima day at Lumbinivana ( Rummindehi District , Nepal ) in the : Sakya Kshatriya clan . His father Suddhodhana was the republican king of
This sorrow can be stopped ( Dukha Nirodha ) : Nirvana . * 4 : There is a path leading to the cessation of sorrow ( Dukha kiran Nirodha Gamini Pratipada ) : Ashtangika Marga .
3 .
Kapilvastu and mother Mahamaya was a princessiona_kiran
Kollia republic .
Note :
After his mother's early death , he was brought up by his step mother and aunt Mahaprajapati Gautami . His father married him at an early age to Yasodhara ( Princess of Shakya dynasty ) from whom he had a son Rahul Four great sights - an old man , a diseased person , a dead body and an ascetic - proved to be a turning point in his

1. Pratityasamutapada is also known as Hetuvada ( theory of cause - effect ) and Kshanabhanga Vada ( theory of momen - tariness / impermanence ) ..
2. Desire is the root cause of sorrow .
3. The ultimate aim of life is to attain nirvana , the eternal , * state of peace and bliss , which means liberation from the cycle of birth and death .
career .

4. Ashtangika Marga ( Eight fold path ) are right observation , right determination , right speech , right action , right livelihood , right exercise , right memory and right meditation . 5. Madhya Marga / Madhyama Pratipada ( the middle path ) Man should avoid both extremes , i.e. a life of comforts and luxury and a life of severe asceticism . Triratna i.e. Three Jewels of Buddhism ...
1. Buddha ( the enlightened )
2. Dharma ( doctrine ) :
3. Sangha ( commune )
At the age of 29 , he renounced home , this was his Mahabhinishkramana ( great going forth ) and became a wandering ascetic . His first teacher was Alara Kalama ( Sankhya philo- sopher ) from whom he learnt the technique of meditation . Great Events of Buddha's Life Janma ( Birth ) Mahabhinishkramana ( Renunciation )
Symbols Lotus and Bull Horse
Patron
Buddha G
Chairman
Result
1 Buddhist 483BC Saptaparni
Ajatashatru Compilation of Sutta Pitaka and Vinaya ( Harayanka Dynasty ) Ananda and Upali respectively .
Mahakassapa
Cave , Rajgriha
Counoll
( 3 ) The monks of Vaishali wanted somechange in rites ( Shisunaga Dynasty ) ( 1 ) Schism into Sthavira - vadins and Mahasanghikag ( ) : Compilation of Abhidhamma Pitaka ( ii ) Decision to send missionaries to various parts of the world '
Buddhist 383 BC Chullavanga
Kalashoka
Sabbakami
Vaishali
3 Buddhist 250BC Ashokarama Mogaliputta Tissa Counci
Ashoka ( Maurya Dynasty )
Vihar , Patliputra
( Compilation of Mahavibhasha shastra ( Sanskri comment on Tripitaka ) ( ii ) the division of Buddhists into Himayanist and Mehaye Join on Telegram @apna channels
Kanishka
Buddh 98 AD Kundala Vana , Chairman - Vasumitra Council
Vice chairman - Ashvaghosa shvaghosa ( Kushana Dynasty )
Kashmir

2. Avlokitesvara ( the lord who looks down ) also called Padmapani ( the lotus bearer ) : kind - hearted .
3. Manjushri ( Stimulator of understanding ) : He holds a book describing 10 paramitas ( spiritual perfections ) .
4. Maitreya : The future Buddha . 5. Kshitigriha : guardian of purgatories . 46. Amitabha / Amitayusha : Buddha of heaven . ' Sacred Shrines Lumbini , Bodh Gaya , Sarnath and Kusinagar , where the four principal events of Buddha's life , namely Birth , Enlightenment , First Sermon and Death took place . To these are added four places Sravasti , Rajgriha , Vaishali and Sankasya - these eight places have all along been considered as the eight holy places ( Ashtasthana's ) . ¨ . Other centres of Buddhism in Ancient India - Amaravati . and Nagarjunikonda in Andhra Pradesh ; Nalanda in Bihar ; Junagadh and Vallabhi in Gujarat ; Sanchi and Bharhut in M.P .; Ajanta - Ellora in Maharashtra ; Dhaulagiri in Orissa ; Kannauj , Kaushambi and Mathura in U.P .; and Jagadala and Somapuri in West Bengal . Buddhist architecture was developed in three forms :
1. Stupa - relics of the Buddha or some prominent Buddhist monks are preserved

1. Pali Texts
Tripitaka : Pitaka literally means basket and it was called so , because the original texts were written on palm - leavesandkeptinbaskets . Vinay Pitaka - monastic code , Sutta Pitaka - Buddha's sayings , Abhidhamma pitaka - religious discourses of Buddha ( Sutta Pitaka comprises Dighgha Nikaya , Majhim Nikaya , Sanyukta Nikaya , Anguttar Nikaya and Khuddak / Kshudraka Nikaya ) . Milindapanho ( i.e. Questions of Milinda ) -a dialogue between Milinda ( identical with Indo - Greek ruler Menander ) and Buddhist saint Nagasena . Dipavamsha and Mahavamsha - The great chronicles of Sri Lanka .
II . Sanskrit Texts
BuddhaCharita , Saundarananda , Sutralankar , Sariputra Prakaran and Vajra Suchi - Ashwagosha ; Mahavibhasha Shastra - Vasumitra ; Visudhamagga , Atthakathayen and Sumangalvasini - Buddhagosha ; Madhyamika Karika and Prajnaparimita Karika - Nagarjuna etc. Sects of Buddhism Hinayana ( i.e. the Lesser Vehicle ) :

1. Its followers believed in the original teaching of Buddha .
2. They sought individual self - discipline and meditation .

2. Chaitya - prayer hall
salvation through

3. Vihara - residence / monasteries Pl

3. They did not believe in idol - worship .
4. They favoured Palilanguage .
Buddhist
@apna Universitie
Founder
Nalanda Odantpun Vikramshila Somapuri Jagadal
Badagaon , Bihar
Kumargupta 1 ( Gupta ruler )

5. It is known as ' Southern Buddhist Religion ' , because it prevailed to the South of India , e.g. Sri Lanka , Burma ( Myanmar ) , Syam ( Thailand ) , Java etc. * There were two subsects of Hinayana - Vaibhasika and Sautantrika .
Sajian
Biharsharif , Bihar
Gopala ( Pala ruler )
Bhagalpur , Bihar
Dharmapala ( Pala ruler )
North Bengal
Dharmapala ( Pala ruler )
Bengal
Ramapala ( Pala ruler ) Bhattarka ( Maitrak ruler )
Vallabhi
Gujarat
Mahayana ( i.e. the Greater Vehicle ) :
Royal Patrons : Bimbisara and Ajatashatru ( Magadhan ruler ) , Prasenjit ( Kosala ruler ) , Udayan ( Vatsa ruler ) , Pradyota ( Avanti ruler ) , Ashoka and Dasharatha . ( Mauryan ruler ) , Milinda / Menander ( Indo - Greek . ruler ) , Kanishka ( Kushana ruler ) , Harshavardhana : ( Vardhana ruler ) , Gopala , Dharmapala and Rampala ( Pala rulers ) .

1. Its followers believed in the heavenliness of Buddha .
and

2. They sought the salvation of all through the
grace
☐ help of Buddha and Bodhisatva ...

3. They believed in idol - worship

4. They favoured Sanskrit language

5. It is known as ' Northern Buddhist Religion ' , because it prevailed to the North of India , e.g. China , Korea , Japan , etc. * 6 : There were two subsects of Mahayana - Madhyamika / ' . Shunyavada ( founder - Nagarjuna ) and Yogachar / Vijnanävada ( founder - Maitreyanath and his disciple * Asanga ) .
Note :

1. Ashoka , the greatest patron of Buddhism , called 3rd Buddhist council and sent mission , comprising his son . Mahendra and his daughter Sanghamitra to Sri Lanka .
2. Kanishka called 4th Buddhist council and sent missions to China , Korea and Japan .
Vajrayana :

3. Palas of Bengal and Bihar were last great patrons of Buddhism . Prominent Buddhist Scholars 1 Mogaliputta Tissa . 3 Century 3rd Century BC . ( Contemporary of Mauryan King Ashoka , Chairman of 3d Buddhist Council held at Pataliputra in 250 BC )
2. Upagupta 35 Century BC ( According to Chinese pilgrim Huen Tsang , Spiritual Guru of Mauryan ruler hannel

1. Its followers believed that salvation could : be best attained by acquiring the magical power , which they which they called Vajra
2. The chief divinities of this new sect were the Taras
3. It became popular in Eastern India , particularly Bengal and Bihar .
Bodhisattvas _A

1. Vajrapani : like Indra he holds a thunderbolt , foe of sin and evil .
on Telegram @ajan

19. Dipankar Srijnan Aatish : 981-1054 AD ( Known as Last Buddhist Acharya of India ' , Head of Vikramshila and other Mahavihars , At age of 60 years he went Tibbet and never come back to India ) 6. Maurya Period ( 322 BC - 185 BC ) Sources for Mauryan History .

1. Literary Sources
> Kautilya's ' Arthasastra ' : The title ' Arthasastra ' means ' The science of material gain ' ( fore a state not a person ) . It is the most important literary source for the Mauryas , It is a treatise on government and polity . It gives a clear and methodological analysis of political and economic conditions of the Mauryan period .
Megasthenese's ' Indica ' : Megasthenese was the ambassador of Selecus Nikator in the court of : Chandragupta Maurya . His ' Indica ' is foremost among all the foreigners ' accounts for Maurya . But its original copy is lost , and it has survived only as quotations in the text of classical Greek writers , such as Strabo , Diodorous , Arrian , Plutarch and Latin writers such as Pliny and Justin . It refers to Mauryan administration , 7 - caste system , absence of slavery and usury in India
etc.
VisakhaDatta's‘Mudra Rakshasa ' : Thoughitwas written : during Gupta Period , it describes how Chandragupta : Maurya got Chanakya's assistance in overthrowing the Nandas . Besides this , it gives an excellent account of the prevailing socio - economic conditions . Puranas : Though a collection of legends interspersed with religious teachings , they give us the chronology . and lists of Mauryan kings . Buddhist Literature :
1. Indian Buddhist text Jatakas ( apartofKhuddaknikaya ofSuttapitaka which describes the 549 stories of Buddha's previous births ) reveal a general picture of socio - economic conditions during Mauryan period .
2. Ceylonese Buddhist chronicles Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa describe the part played by Ashoka in spreading Buddhism to Sri Lanka . 3 . Tibetan Buddhist text Divyavadana gives information about Ashoka and his efforts in spreading Buddhism .
2. Archaeological Sources Ashokan Edicts and Inscriptions : There are Rock Edicts , Pillar Edicts and Cave Inscriptions located at several · places in the Indian sub - continent . Their importance came to be appreciated only after their decipheration by James Princep in 1837 and also the identification of Ashoka as the author of these edicts in the beginning of the 20th century . Majority of them are in the nature of Ashoka's proclamations to the public at large , and only a small group of them describe his own acceptance of Buddhism and his relationship with the Sangha ( Commune ) . Though Prakrit was the language used in them , the script varied from region to region ( Kharoshti . in the North - West , Greek and Aramaic in the West and Brahmi in the East of India ) . Other Inscriptions Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman , Sohgaura Copper Plate Inscription in Gorakhpur district of UP , Mahasthan Inscription in Join on Telegram @apna channels
. : 166-96 AD , Major Works : Madhyamika Karika_kiran ' Prajnaparimita Karika ' etc , His disciple Aryadeva : .3rd century AD was a well known philospher of Madhyamika branch ) 9. Asang : 4th Century AD ( An Amatya i.e. minister of Gupta ruler Samudragupta : 335-75 AD , A prominent commentator of Yogachar / Vijnanvad branch of Mahayan sect , Major works : ' Yogacharbhumishastra ' , Vajrachhediha Tika ' etc ) 10. Vasubandhu : 4th Century AD ( A younger brother of Asang , Major works : ' Vijnaptimatrata Siddhi ' etc ) 11. Dingnag : 345-425 AD ( Founder of Buddhist Logic ) 12. Sanghbhuti : 381 AD ( A Buddhist monk of Kashmir origin , reached China in the time of Chien Yuan of Chin dynasty in 381 , An expert of Sarvastivadi sect )

13. Buddhaghosa : born - 390 AD [ An important commen- tator of Buddhism , Major Works " Vishuddhimaggʻ ( Known as ' Key of Tripitaka ' ) , ' Sumangalvilasini ' ( commentry on Dighghnikaya ) ]

14. Chandragomin : 5th Century AD ( A Buddhist grammarian , Famous work : ' Chandravyakaran ' ) 15. Chandrakriti : 7th Century AD ( A Buddhist philosopher ) " 16. Diwakarmitra : 7th Century AD ( A Buddhist monk and courtier of Harshavardhana ) : 17. Shantirakshit : 8th century AD ( A teacher of Nalanda Mahavihar , Visited Tibbet on the invitation of Tibbetan ruler ) 18. Padmasambhavy : 9th Century AD ( A Buddhist monk , Visited Tibbet on the invitation of Tibbetan ruler and spread Buddhism there , Founder of Lama ' sect in Tibbet )
" .

1. Rock Edicts
Manshera ( Pakistan ) Shahbajgarhi ( Mardan , Pakistan ) , Kalsi ( Dehradun , Uttarakhand ) , Junagadh ( Girnar , Gujarat ) , Sopara ( Thane , Maharas Yerragudi ( Kurnul , Andhra Pradesh ) , Dhauli ( Khurda , Orissa ) , Jaugada ( Ganjam , Orissa ) New system of administration Daulior : Tosall ( Khurda , Orrisa ) , Jaugada ( Ganjam , Orissa ) . after the Kalinga war Personal history of Ashoka and Sasaram ( Bihar ) , Maski ( Ratchur district , Karnataka ) , Bhabru - Bairat summary of his dhamma . ( Rajasthan ) , Rupanath ( MP ) , Gavimath , Palkig - undu , Siddhpur , Jating Rameshwar , Brahmagiri ( Karnataka )
4. Bhabru - Bairat Rock Edicts Ashoka ' conversion to Buddhism Bhabru - Bairat ( Rajasthan ) Pillar Edicts .
114 Major Rock Edicts
Various Principles of Dhamma

2.2 Kalinga Rock Edicts

3. Minor Rock Edicts
་ ་
Meerut - Delhi ( Chhoti Lata ) , Topra - Delhi ( Badi Lata ) , Allahabad ( UP ) , Lauriya Nandangadh , Lauriya Areraj and Rampurva ( Bihar ) Signs of Ashoka's fanaticism about Sanchi ( MP ) , Sarnath and Allahabad ( UP ) Dhamma

1.7 Pillar Edicts .
Appendix to rock Edicts
24 Minor Pillar Edicts

3.2 Tarai Pillar Edicts . Cave Edicts
Ashoka's respect for Buddhism
Rummandei / Lumbini and Nigaliva ( Taraf of Nepal )
Barabar Hills Jehanabad , Bihar ) : to elevate the social position of Ashoka ( their patron ) and his predecessors . * In conclusion , we can say that the Mauryas belonged to the Moriya tribe and were certainly of a low caste , @apna_kirathough it is not clear as to which low caste .
3 Barabar Cave Edicts
Ashoka's toleration
Ashokan 14 Major Rock Edicts
Contents
1 Prohibition of animal sacrifices and festive gatherings .
2. Measures of social welfare :
Respect to Brahamanas .
Chandragupta Maurya : 322 BC - 298 BC > Chandragupta dethroned the last Nanda ruler . Dhananand and occupied Patliputra in 322 BC with the help of Kautilya ( Chanakya ) . > In 305 BC , Chandragupta Maurya defeated Selecus Nikator , who surrendered a vast territory including Aria ( herat ) , Arachosia ( Kandhar ) , Gedrosia ( Baluchistan ) and Paropanisade ( Kabul ) , in return for 500 elephants . According to the treaty between Chandragupta , and Selecus , the Hindukush became the boundry between their states . ➤ Megasthenese was a Greek ambassador sent to the court of Chandragupta Maurya by Selecus Nikator . Chandragupta became a jain and went to Chandragiri **** Hill , Sravanbelgola ( Karnataka ) with Bhadrabahu , ¨ where he died by slow starvation ( Kaya - Klesha / Salekhan ) .

4. Courtesy to relatives , elders , consideration for animals . 5. Appointment of Dhamma Mahamatras and their duties .

6. Need for efficient organisation of administration ( orders.to Dhamma Mahamatras ) . to 7. Need for tolerance among all religious sects . 8 System of Dhamma - yatras . 9. Attack on meaningless ceremonies and rituals . 10. Conquest through Dhamma instead of war . 11. Explanation of Dhamma - policy . + 12 Appeal for tolerance among all religious sects . 13. Kalinga war , mention of 5 contemporary Hellenic ( Greek ) kings 14. Inspiration to spend religious life .
Origin of the Mauryas
The Puranas describe them as Shudras . ' Mudrakshasa ' of Vishakhadattauses the terms Vrishal / Kulhina ( of low clan ) .
The Classical writers , such as Justin , describe Chandragupta only as a man of humble origin . The Junagarh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman ( 150 AD ) has some indirect evidence , suggesting that the Mauryas might have been of Vaishya origin . The Buddhist works , on the other hand , try to link the Mauryan dynasty with the Sakya Kshatriya clan to which Buddha belonged . According to them , the region from which the Mauryas came was full of peacocks ( Mor ) , and hence they came to be known as ' Moriyas > C Chandragupta Maurya was succeeded by his It is obvious from this that the Buddhists were trying
Under Chandragupta Maurya , the whole of Northern India was united for the first time .. Trade flourished , agriculture was regulated , weights and measures were standardised and money came into
use .
Taxation , sanitation and famine . relief , became the concerns of the state . Bindusara : 298 BC - 273 BC
* son '
Bindusara
Join of
Tele

2. Folk / Popular Art :
1. Figure Sculpture of Yaksha- Yakshini etc. e.g. Yaksha of Parkham ( Mathura ) , Yakshini of Besanagar / Vidisha ( M.P. ) , Chanwar - bearer " Yakshini of Didarganj ( Patna ) .
2. Terracotta objects .
3. Inscribed stone portrait of Emperor Ashok / Broken relief sculpture of Emperor Ashok ( Kanaganhalli , Karnataka ) .
The Mauryas introduced stone masonry on a large scale during Ashoka . Fragments of stone pillars and wooden floor and ceiling indicating the existence of an 80 - pillared hall have been discovered at Kumhrar on the outskirts of Patna . Seeing this Fahien remarks as follows : ' These palaces are so beautiful and excellent that they appear to be the creation of God rather than of men ' . The pillars represent the masterpieces of Mauryan . sculpture . Each pillar is made of single piece of sandstone , only their capitals , which are beautiful pieces of sculpture in form of lion or bulls , are joined on the top with the pillar . Four lion capital at Sarnath and Sanchi . Lioned capital of Sarnath was adopted as ' National Emblem ' of India on 26 Jan. , 1950. ... Single lion capital at Rampurva and Lauriya Nandangarh . Single bull capital at Rampurva . A carved elephant at Dhauli and engraved elephant at Kalsi . " The Mauryan artisans who started the practice of hewing out caves from rocks for monks to live in . The
earliest example are Barabar caves ( Sudama , Worlda kir Satakarni I , its 3rd ruler , raised its power and prestige
dynasty .
Hut , Chaupada of Kama , Rishi Lomesh ) in Jehanabad ( Ashokan ) . The other examples are Nagarjuni caves in Gaya ( Dasharath ) . Stupas were built throughout the empire to enshrine the relics of Buddha . Of these , the most famous are at Sanchi and Bharhuta .
through conquests .
" Hala , its 17th ruler was the author of ' Gathasaptasati ' or , ' Sattasai ' in Prakrit . Gunadhya , the author of ' Vrihat Katha ' ( in Prakrit ) was the contemporary of Hala . It was Gautamiputra Satakarni ( 106-130 AD ) who revived the Satavahana power and defeated the Saka , Ksatrap Nahapaña . He was the greatest Satavahan * ruler ( 23rd Satavahana ruler ) .
Atall times , whether I am eating , or am in the women's apartments , or in my inner apartments , or at the cattleshed , or in my carriage , or in my gardens - wherever I may be my Mahamattar should keep me in touch with public business ' .
Vasishthiputra Sri Satakarni , its 24th ruler was married to the daughter of Saka Kstrapa Rudradaman , but defeated by him twice . Yajna Sri Satakarni , its 27th ruler was the dynasty's last great ruler . Pulamavi IV ; its 30th ruler was the last Satavahana ruler . > Satavahanas were finally succeeded by the Ikshvakus in 3rd Century AD . > Satavahanas started the practice of donating land with fiscal and administrative immunities to Brahmanas and Buddhist monks , which eventually weakened their authority . The earliest inscriptional evidence of land : grant in India belongs to 1st century BC . Under the Satavahanas , many Chaityas ( worship halls ) and Viharas ( monasteries ) were cut out from rocks mainly in North - West Deccan or Maharashtra . The famous examples were Nasik , Kanheri and Karle . Stupas ( large round structure erected over . a sacred , relic ) were seen scattered all around Ellora , The mos ! famous of these attributed to the Satavahana period Join on Telegram @apna channels
Rock Edict VI
All men are my children - Kalinga Rock Edict ( Dhauli ) : 7.I. Post - Maurya / Pre - Gupta Period ( 185 BC - 319 AD ) Native Successors of Mauryas Sunga Dynasty : 185 BC - 73 BC . [ Capital - Vidisha ( M.P. ) ] Sunga Dynasty was established by Pushyamitra Sunga , a Brahmin Commander - in - Chief of the last Mauryan ruler named Brihadratha in 185 BC . Pushyamitra was a staunch adherent of orthodox Hinduism . However , the great Buddhist stupa at Bharhut ( in M.P. ) was built during the reign of Sungas . Pushyamitra was succeeded by his son Agnimitra , the hero of Kalidasa's drama ' Malvikagnimitra'.g After : Agnimitra , a series of weak rulers such as Vasumitra , Vajramitra , Bhagabhadra , Devabhuti , followed , leading to the decline of the dynasty ....

1. Amaravati School ( 150 BC - 400 AD ) -Salvahanas 2 Gandhar School ( 50 BC - 5th Century AD ) -Saka - Kushans Mathura School ( 150 AD - 300 AD ) -Saka - Kushans . Note The influence of Greek sculpture is very evident in the Gandhar school , while the Mathura school , evolved an indigenous form > In 46-47 AD , Hippalus , a greek sailor , discovered the monsoon sea - route to India from West Asia .
Important ports : Barygaza ( Bharoch ) and Barbaricum ( Western Coast ) , Aricamedu ( Podeku - according to ' Periplus ' ) - near Pandicheri - Eastern Coast . ' Bullion was flowing out of Rome to India'- ' Geographica Strabo , ' Geography ' - Ptolemy ,
' Natural History ' Pliny , ' Periplus of the Erithryan Sea ' - Unknown . India had contacts with Central Asia , China , Graceo- Roman World and South - East Asia .
In about 58 BC a king of Ujjain - Vikramaditya - is . supposed to have fought effectively against the Sakas . An era called Vikrama Samvat is reckoned from 5S BC . The Parthians : 1st Century BC - 1st Century AD > Originally the Parthians ( Pahlavas ) lived in Iran . They replaced the Sakas in North - Western India , but controlled an area much smaller than the Sakas .... The most famous Parthian king was Gundaphernes during whose reign St. Thomas is said to have come to India for the propagation of Christianity ,
; ..

7.II. The Sangam Period ( 1st - 3rd Century AD ) Three Early Kingdoms
Amg ] Emb dom len The Bow ¡ Chera
Capital
First Famous
Ruler Rier
arayur Main Ports Udiyan - Senguttuvan nd Tondi
( Red Chera )
geral
Join on Telegram @apna_chann

8. Gupta Period ( 319 AD - 540 AD )
➤ In 4th Century AD the Guptas , a new dynasty , arose in Magadha and established a large kingdom over the greater part of Northern India ( though their empire was not as large as that of the Mauryas ) . Their rule lasted for more than 200 years . This period is referred to as the ' Classical Age " or ' Golden Age ' of ancient India and was perhaps the most prosperous era in the Indian history . According to epigraphic evidence , the founder of the dynasty was a person named Gupta . He used the simple title of Maharaja . Gupta was succeeded by his son Ghatotkach , who also . inherited the title of Maharaja .
His greatest achievement was the political unification of most of India or Aryavarta into a formidable power . Titles : Kaviraja i.e. king of poets ( Prayaga Prasasti ) , Param Bhagavat ( Nalanda copper plate ) , Ashvamedha parakramaie . whose might was demonstrated by the horse - sacrifice ( coin ) , Vikrami.e.prowess ( coin ) , Sarva- raj - ochcheitai.e . uprooter of all kings ( coin ) etc. Note : Only Gupta ruler to be the title of Sarva - raj - ochehhetta Original types of Gold Coins ( Dinars ) : Garud typė , Dhanurdhari i.e. Archer type , Axe type , Ashvamedha type , Vyaghrahanan i.e. Tiger killing type , Veenavadan i.e. lute playing type . Samudragupta was a Vaishnavite . According to the Chinese writer Wang - Hiuen - Tse , Meghavarna , king of Sri Lanka , sent an embassy to Samudragupta for his permission to build a monastery for Buddhist pilgrims at Bodh Gaya . Chandragupta II " Vikramaditya ' : 380-414 AD According to Devi Chandragupta ' ( Vishakhadatta ) , Samudragupta was succeeded by Ramgupta It seems Ramgupta ruled for a very short period . He was ' the only Gupta ruler to issue copper coins ” . Ramagupta , a coward and impotent king , agreed to surrender his queen Dhruvadevito Saka invader . But the prince Chandragupta II , the younger brother of the king resolved to go to the enemy's camp in the guise of the queen with a view to kill the hated enemy . Chandragupta II succeeded in falling the Saka ruler .
The Gupta Dynasty
Chandragupta I
[ 319-334 AD )
Samudragupta
335-380 AD
Ramgupta
380 AD
Chandragupta Il ( Vikramaditya ) 380-414 AD
Kumargupta ( Mahendraditya )
415-455 AD
Skandagupta I
455-467 AD
Purugupta-
1925
Kumargupta Il- Buddhgupta Narsimhagupta❤❤ Kumargupta III .
467-540 AD
Chandragupta I : 319-334 AD
He was the first Gupta ruler to assume the title of Maharajadhiraja
oin on Telegra a Qapi
hannel

2. Amarsinh ( Amarsinhkosha )

3. Dhanavantri ( Navanitakam - medicine text )

4. Varahmihira ( Panch Sidhantaka , Vrihatsamhita , Vrihat Jataka , Laghu Jataka ) 5. Araruchi ( Vartika - a comment on Ashtadhyayi )

7. Kshapranak 9. Shanku .

6. Ghatakarna
8 .. Velabhatt
@apn :
- Fahien , a Chinese pilgrim , visited India Chandragupta's reign and described what he saw in his travelogue ' fo - gu - oji ' Titles : Devagupta / Devaraja / Devashri , Parama Bhagavata , Narendra Chandra , Sinh Vikram etc. Original types of Gold coins ( Dinaras ) : Ashvarohi type , Chhatradhari type , Chakra - Vikram type etc. Kumaragupta I : 415-455 AD Chandragupta - II was succeeded by his Kumaragupta - I .
Gupta Inscriptions Inscriptions Samudragupta Prayaga / Allahabad Stone Pillar
Rulers
Their Character Prasasti
son
Prasast
Eran Stone Pillar
Towards the end of his reign , the Gupta empire was threatened from the North by the Huns , who were temporarily checked by his son Skandagupta .. Kumaragupta was the worshipper of god Kartikeya He founded the Nalanda Mahavihara which developed into a great centre of learning . Titles Mahendraditya , Mahendra Singh and Ashvamedha Mahendrah ( coins ) etc. Original types of Gold Coins ( Dinars ) : Khadgadhari type , Gajarohi type , Gajarohi Sinh - nihanta , type , Khang - nihanta i.e. rhinoceros - slayer type , Kartikeya type , Apratigh - mudra type etc. Skandagupta : 455-467 AD Skandagupta , the last great ruler of the Gupta dynasty . During his reign the Gupta empire was invaded by the Huns : He succeeded in defeating the Huns , Success in repelling the Huns seems to have been celebrated by the assumption of the title Vikramaditya ' ( Bhitari Pillar Inscription )
Nalanda Copper Plate Royal Charter
Chandraguptall Mehrauli Iron Pillar Skandagupta Junagarh Rock
Prasasti
Prasasti
Bhitari Pillar Indore Stone Pillar
Prasasti
Royal Charter ( Evidence of sub - infeudation )
Buddhagupta Paharpur Copper Plate Royal Charter ( Evidenc of state ownership of land ,
Administration
Centralised control was not as fully realized under the . Guptas as it had been under the Mauryas .
> The Guptan administration thus highly decentralised , and as patrimonial bureaucracy reached its logical conclusion . In hereditary grants it reflected the quasi - feudal character of the economy . It comprised a network of self governing tribes.and tributary kingdoms and their chiefs often served as representatives of imperial powers , Join on Telegram @apna_channels
was

1. Manusmriti ' was translated into English under the title of ' Institutes of Hindoo Law ' by William Jones .
2. Abhijnana Shakuntalam ( i.e. recognition of Shakuntala ) was translated in English by William Jones .
3. Kalidas is known as ' the Shakespeare of India ' .
4. ' Mrichchakatika ' ( i.e. the clay cart ) , love story of a poor brahman Charudatta and the virtuous courtesan Vasantasena , is notable for its realistic depiction of city life . 5. ' Kamsutra ' is the earliest book on sex . 6. ' Brahmasidhanta ' was translated in Arabic under the title of ' Sind Hind ' . Gupta Period : Golden Age of Ancient India - Reality or Myth ?

1. Rock - cut caves : Ajanta and Ellora Group ( Maharashtra ) and Bagh ( MP ) ...
2. Structural Temples : Dasavatara temple of Deogarh Jhansi district , UP ) -the oldest and the best , Siva temple of Bhumra ( Nagod , MP ) , Vishnu and Kankali temple ( Tigawa , MP ) , Parvati temple of Nanchana- Kuthara ( Panna district , MP ) , Shiva temple of Khoh ( Satna , Panna , MP ) , Krishna brick temple of Bhittargaon ( Kanpur , UP ) , Laxman temple of Sirpur ( Raipur , MP ) , Vishnu temple and Varah temple of Eran ( MP ) .
3. Stupas : Mirpur khas ( Sindh ) , Dhammekh ( Saranath ) and Ratnagiri ( Orissa ) . The art of architecture attained great heights . By evolving the Nagara Style ( Shikhar style ) , the Gupta art ushers in the history of Indian architecture . Shikhara Shrine , a Vaishnava symbol , one of the most characteristic features of temple architecture , found its fullest development during this period . The temple . architecture , with its garbha griha ( shrine room ) in which the image of the god was placed , began with the Guptas . The fragmentary remains of Dasavatara temple of Deogarh is the example of the most ornate and beautifully composed Gupta temple building ... The centres of the Gandhar sculptures declined & their places were taken by Benaras , Patliputra and Mathura For the first time we get images of Vishnu , Shiva and other Gods .
Arguments :
For
1. There were political units ; foreign rule was completely removed and peace and prosperity prevailed ;
2. Enlightened character of government , i.e. taxes were light , punishment mild , etc.3 . Revival of Hinduism but there was tolerance of all other religions
4. Use of Sanskrit developed and art and literature flourished during the period 5. Great personage like Kalidasa , Amarsinha , Dhanavantri , Aryabhatta , Varahamihira etc. lived during this period . Against : 1 . Existence of too many feudatories2 . Absence of large Central army and Bureaucracy
3. Development of . Feudal elements ( Increasing land grants , Serfdom , Sub- infeudation etc. )
4. Decline of trade and Guilds 5. Decline of urban centres 6. Increasing Varna distinction and social disorder 7. Decline in status of women , Join on Telegram @apna channels

9. Post - Gupta Period / Vardhana Dynasty ( 550 AD - 647 AD ) Pushyabhuti / Vardhana Dynasty The Pushyabhuti or Vardhana dynasty was founded at Thaneswar ( Kurukshetra district , Haryana ) by Pushyabhuti probably towards the beginning of the 6th century . Pushyabhuti were the feudatories of the Guptas , but has assumed independence after the Hun Invasions .
> The area under his control covered many parts Northern India , Eastern Rajasthan and the : Ganges : Valley as far as Assam . His empire included territories . of distant feudal kings too . . > - Harsha maintained diplomatic relations with China . In 641 AD , he sent an envoy to Tai - Tsung , the Tang Emperor of China . Three Chinesemissions subsequently visited his court . Hluen - Tsang , the celebrated Chinese pilgrim , visited India during Harsha's reign . He spent about eight years ( 635-643 AD ) in the dominions of Harsha . Hiuen - Tsang mentions two most celebrated events of Harsha's reign the assemblies at Kannauj and at Prayaga . The Kannauj assembly ( 643 AD ) was held in the honour of Hiuen - Tsang and to popularise
➤ The first important ruler of the dynasty was Prabhakaravardhana ( 580-605 AD ) . Prabhakaravardhana was succeeded by his eldest son Rajyavardhana ( 605-606 AD ) . ➤ Rajyavardhana had to face problems from the day of his succession to the throne . Grahavarman , the Maukhari ruler of Kannauj and husband of Rajyashri ( sister of Rajyavardhana ) was murdered by Deva Gupta ( the ruler of Malwa ) who in alliance with Shashanka ( ruler of Gaud or North - Western Bengal ) now occupied Kannauj and imprisoned Rajyashri . ➤ Rajyavardhana , therefore , undertook a campaign against Deva Gupta and killed him but he was killed by Shashanka in 606 AD . In the meanwhile Rajyashri escaped into the forests of Central India . Harshavardhana : 606-647 AD
* Mahayana sect of Buddhism . The Prayaga assembly , was held in 643-644 AD . In Prayaga , Harshavardhana used to celebrate religious festivals at the end of every five years , at the confluence of the Ganges , the Yamuna … .. and the Saraswati . It is said that this was the beginning of Kumbha fair . Harshavardhana was a Shaiva by faith , but he showed equal respect to other sects . Hiuen - Tsang portrays him : as a liberal Buddhist ( Mahayana ) who also honoured gods of other sects . According to Hiuen - Tsang , Nalanda University meant for Buddhist monks was maintained by the revenue from 100 villages which was granted by Harshavardhana . He died in 647 AD . Harsha does not appear to have any @apna_kiraheir to his throne , which was usurped after his death by
After the killing of Rajavardhana , his younger brother , Harshavardhana also known as Siladitya , ascended the Pushyabhuti throne in 606 AD and from this year started the Harsha Era .
After ascending the throne Harsha first rescued his widowed sister ' Rajyashri , from the Vindhyan forest , .where she was going to throw herself into fire . Harsha drove out Shashanka from Kannauj who had occupied it after killing Rayavardhana . He not only unified Kannauj with Thaneswar but also made it his new capital , which made him the most powerful king of North India . > Harsha thereafter , proceeded towards the east against Shashanka with a view to avenging the death of his brother , Rajyavardhana and brother - in - law , Grahavarman . Harsha was not successful in his first expedition against Gaud , but in his second expedition towards the close of his reign , after the death of Shashanka ( died in 637 AD ) , he conquered Magadha ' and Shashanka's empire . Harshavardhana defeated Dhruvasena II , the Maitraka ruler of Vallabhi . However , Harsha , in order to secure the safety of the western boundary , reinstated him and gave his daughter in marriage to Dhruvasena II . Dhruvasena II accepted the position of a feudatory . vassal . It was an important diplomatic achievement of Harsha . The course of Harsha's conquests suffered a serious setback on his expedition towards the Deccan . Pulkeshin II of Chalukya dynasty of Vatapi / Vadami inflicted a ⚫ decisive defeat on him at the bank of Narmada . It was the only defeat of Harsha's victorious life . The Chalukya records describe Harsha as the lord of the whole of Northern country ( Sakalottarapatheshvara )
his minister named Arunashva Harshavardhana was not only a patron of learning , but was himself an accomplished author . He wrote three Sanskrit plays - Nagananda , Ratnavali and Priyadarsika . He gathered around him a circle of learned men , of whom Banabhatta , the author of Harshacharita ( an important historical work narrating the incidents of the earlier part of Harsha's reign ) and Kadambari ( a poetical novel of great literary merit ) and Mayur , the author of Mayur Shataka and Surya Shatak are the well known ones . Banabhatta wrote that the King ( Harsha ) was an accomplished lute player . * Harsha governed his empire on the same lines as the Guptas did , except that his administration had become more feudal and decentralised . States of the Deccan and South India Chalukyas of Vatapi / Vadami : 543-755 AD The Vakataka power was followed by Chalukyas . Chalukyas established their capital at Vatapi / Badami in the district of Bagalkot in Karnataka . Pulakesin II ( 609-42 AD ) was able to check Harsha's design to conquer Deccan .. Aihole inscription is an eulogy written by his court poet Ravikirti ... He sent an ambassador to the Persian King Khusrau II in 625 AD and also received one from him . The Chine The Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang visited his kingdom
Join on Telegram : @apna
chann

10. Early - Medieval Period ( 650-1206 ) Both Chalukyas and Pallavas tried to establish their I. North India ( Rajputa Period ) supremacy over the land between Krishna and After Harshavardhana , the Rajputas emerged as a Tungabhadra . powerful force in Northern India and dominated the Indian Pallava king Narsimhavarman ( 630-668 AD ) occupied - kira political scene for nearly 500 years from the 7th Chalukyan capital Vatapi in about 642 AD and assumed the title Vatapikonda i.e. conqueror of Vatapi . Pallavas were instrumental in spreading Indian culture in South - East Asia . Till the 8th century AD Pallava influence was predominant in Cambodia . The Pallava type of Shikhara is to be found in the temples of Java , Cambodia and Annam .
@apna
century . Founder
10 Important Rajputa Period Capital
Kingdoms
Chauhan / Chahaman of 7th Cen- Delhi Delhi - Ajmer
Vasudeva
1192
730-1036 Avanti , Kannauj
Nagabhatt - I
Pratihara / Parihar of
Kannauj
790-1150 Ujjain , Dhar Seeak - II Sri Harsha
Pawar / Parmar of
Malwa
Pallava Art
Chaulukya / Solanki of 942-1187 Anihalvada Mularaja - I Kathiyawar Rastrakuta of Malkhand 752-973 Malkhand / Dantidurg ( Dant
Pallavas began the Dravida style of temple architecture , which reached its culmination under the rule of Cholas . The development of temple architecture , particularly Dravida style , under the Pallavas can be seen in four stages : Mahendravarmana Mahendravarmana ITemple at Bhairavkona
Manyakheta Varman - II ) 831-1202 Khajuraho , Nannuk Mahoba , Chandela
Chandela of Jejakabhukti .
Kalinjar
850-1211 Tripuri
Kalchuri / Haihaya of
Kokkala - I
( North Arcot Distt . ) , Ananteswar temple at Undavalli ( Guntur Distt )
( 600-630 AD )
Group
Chedi
Gadhawal / Rathor of 1090-1194 Kannauj
Chandradeva
Mammala Group Narsimhavarmana I Mandapa
Kannauj
templés
Mammala ( 630-668 AD )
and Ratha temples ( Sapt Pagodas ) Mammalapuram ( Mahabalipuram ) .
Tomar of Surrounding areas of Haryana and Delhi
Dhillika
Guhilota / Sisodiya of 8th Cen.- Chittor
Bappa Rawal , Hammir - I
Rajasimha Group Narsimhavarmana II Kailashnátha
1930
Mewar
' Rajsimha ' ( 680-720 AD )
VaikunthPerumal Temple at Kanchi , Shore temple at Mammalapuram
Tripartite Struggle
> Towards the close of the 8th century AD , there were three great power in India - the Palas in the East , the Gurjar - Partihara in the North and the Rashtrakutas n the Deccan . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Nandivarmana Aparajit ( 879-897 AD )
Aparajit Group
Mukteshwar Matangeshwar temple at Kanchi , Parshurameswar temple at Gudimallam
and

5. Qarachi Expedition ( 1330 ) : This expedition was launched in Kumaon hills in Himalayas allegedly to counter Chinese incursions . It also appears that the expedition was directed against some refractory tribes in Kumaon - Garhwal region with the object of bringing them under Delhi Sultanate . The first attack was a success but when the rainy season set in , the invaders suffered terribly . His five projects led to revolts . His last days were spent in checking the revolts ( altogether 36 revolts in 25 years ) . Mudurai became independent ( Jalaluddin Ahsan Shah )
1335
Foundation of Vijayanagar ( Harihar and Bukka ) , Warangal became independent ( Kanhaiya ) 1341-47 Revolts of Sada Amirs and Foundation of Bahamani in 1347 ( Hasan Gangu ) He died in Thatta while campaigning in Sindh against Taghi , a turkish slave . Firoz Shah Tughlaq : 1351-88 > He was a cousin of Mohammad - bin - Tughlaq . After his death the nobles and theologians of the court selected Firoz Shah as the next Sultan . After his accession Firoz Tughlaq was faced with the problem of preventing the imminent break up of Delhi Sultanate . He adopted the policy of trying to appease the nobility , army and theologians and of asserting his authority over only such areas , which could be easily administered from the centre . He therefore made no attempt to re - assert his authority over South India and Deccan . @apna_kiran He decreed that whenever a noble died his son should
1336
Transfer of Capital ( 1327 ) : The most controversial step which Mohammad - bin - Tughlaq undertook soon after his accession was the so - called transfer of capital from Delhi to Devagiri . Devagiri had been a base for the expansion of Turkish rule in South India . It appears that the Sultan wanted to make Devagiri second capital so that he might be able to control South India better . Devagiri was thus named Daulatabad . After a couple of years Mohammad - bin - Tughlaq decided to abandon Daulatabad largely became he soon found that just as he could not control South India from Delhi , he could not control North from Daulatabad .
3. Introduction of Token Currency ( 1329 ) : Mohammad- bin - Tughlaq decided to introduce bronze coins , which were to have same value as that of the silver coins . Mohammad - bin - Tughlaq might have been successful if he could prevent people from forging new coins . He was not able to do so and soon the new coins began to be greatly devalued in markets . Finally Mohammad- bin - Tughlaq decided to withdraw the token currency . He promised to exchange silver pieces for bronze coins . Proposed Khurasan Expedition ( 1329 ) : The Sultan had a vision of universal conquest . He decided to conquer Khurasan and Iraq and mobilised a huge army for the purpose . He was encouraged to do so by Khurasani . nobles who had taken shelter in his court . Moreover , there was instability in Khurasan on account of the unpopular rule of Abu Said . This project was also abandoned .
be allowed to succeed to his position including his Iqta and if he had no sons , his son - in - law and in his absence . his slave was to succeed . Firoz extended the principle of heredity to the army . Soldiers were allowed to rest in peace and to send in their place their sons . The soldiers were not paid in cash but by assignments on land revenue of villages ( Vajeha ) . This novel technique of payment led to many abuses . Firoz tried to win over the theologians proclaiming that he was a true Muslim king and the state under him was truly Islamic . In order to keep the theologians satisfied I a number of them were appointed to high offices . > He tried to ban practices which the orthodox theologians considered non - Islamic . Thus he prohibited the practice of Muslim women going out to worship at the graves of saints . > It was during the time of Firoz that Jizya became a separate tax . Firoz refused to exempt the Brahmanas from payment of Jizya since this was not provided for in Shariat .
The new system of taxation was according to Quran . Four kinds of taxes sanctioned by the Quran were imposed . These taxes were Kharaj , Zakat , jizya and Khams . Kharaj was the land tax , which was equal to 1/10 of the produce of the land , Zakat was 2 % tax on property , Jizya was levied on non - Muslims and Khams was 1/5 of the booty captured during war . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

11.II.Vijayanagar and Other Kingdoms . VIJAYANAGAR EMPIRE : 1336-1565 AD ➤ Vijayanagar kingdom and the city were founded ☐ by Harihar and Bukka ( sons of Sangama ) who were feudatories of Kakatiyas and later became minister in the court of Kampili . > Vijayanagar kingdom lay in the Deccan , to the south of the Bahmani kingdom . ➤ Vijayanagar period can be divided into four distinct dynasties viz . Sangama , Saluva , Tuluva and Aravidu . The Sangama Dynasty : 1336-1485 AD . > Harihara - I and Bukka - I ( 1336-56 ) : They laid the foundation of Vijaya - nagar . Vijayanagar - Bahamani conflict began with the foundation of kingdoms . Clashona
of interests in three areas : Raichur doab ( between Krishna and Tungabhadra ) , Krishna - Godavari delta and Marathwada . Bukka - I ( 1356-79 ) : Bukka - l strengthened the city of Vidyanagar and renamed it Vijayanagar . He restored harmony between the warring Vaishnavas and the Jains . The Kings of Malabar ; Ceylon and other countries¨ · kept ambassadors at his court . Harihar II ( 1379-1404 ) ; Bukka - I was succeeded by his son Harihar - II . .
He was a gifted scholar in both Telugu and Sanskrit , of which only two works are extant : the Telugu work on polity ' Amuktamalyada and the Sanskrit drama ' Jambavati Kalyanam " His court was adorned by the ' Ashtadiggajas " ( the eight celebrated poetsofTelugu ) :
1. Peddana ( ' Manucharitam )
2. Timmaya ( ' Parijata Apaharanama “ )
3. Bhattamurthi “
4. Dhurjati 5. Mallan 6. Raju Ramchandra 7. Surona 8. Tenali Ramkrisha ( ' Panduranga Mahamatya ' ) . > Krishna Deva Raya , a contemporary of Babur , was the most illustrious ruler of the Deccan .. Duarte Barbosa and Dominigo Paes Portuguese travellers , visited Vijaya - nagar during the time of Krishna Deva Raya .
2 :
Dynasty Sangama
Period
Founder Harihar and Bukka
1336-1485
Saluva
1485-1505
Saluva Narsimha
Tuluva Aravidu
1505-1570
Veer Narsimha Tirumala
1570-1650
Deva Raya I ( 1406-22 ) : He was the third son of Harihara II . His greatest achievement was his irrigation works where a dam was built across the Tungabhadra , with canals leading to the city . Nicolo de conti visited Vijayanagar during his reign . Deva Raya II ( 1423-46 ) : He was the grandson of Deva Raya I. Ahmad Shahl of Bahamani invaded Vijayanagar and exacted a war indemnity . Deva Raya II began the practice of employing Muslim cavalrymen and archers in the army on large scale ( Their induction had begun during Deva Raya I ) . He was called Praudh Deva Raya In his inscriptions he has the title of Gajabetekara ( the elephant hunter ) .Sri Lanka paid a regular tribute to him . He was follower of Vira Shavism , yet he respected other
Achyuta Deva Raya ( 1529-42 ) : Krishna Deva Raya nominated his brother Achyuta Deva Raya as the _successor . During his reign , Farao Nunij a Portugese horse trader , visited Vijayanagar . * Venkata 1 ( 1542 ) and Sadashiva Raya ( 1543-76 ) : Real power was exercised by Rama Raja / Raya and his two brothers . The five successor states of the Bahamani empire were divided through Rama Raja's diplomacy .. The Battle of Talikota ( also called the Battle of Rakshasa- Tangadi was fought on 23 Jan. , 1565. Rama Raja was taken prisoner and executed by Hussain Nizam Shah I. The city of Vijayanagar , which was the pride of medieval world , was mercilessly destroyed . Caesar Frederick a Italian traveller , visited Vijayanagar in 1567-68 during of Sadashiva religions : Dijoins on Telegram @apna channels @ apnádchannels

2. Bijapur
1489 .
Yusuf Adil Adil Shahi 1686
Mandaleswar
Mandalam ( ie Province )
Shah Malik
( Aurangzeb )
Naduprabhu
Nadu ( Le District )
3 Ahmadnagar 1490
Nizam
1633
Gram ( ie Village )
Gauda
Ahmad Shahi
( Shahjahan )
They were granted tax free lands Manyams which they were to enjoy in perpetuity . The Vijayanagar rulers issued gold coins called Varahas or Pagodas . The Perta was half a Varaha . The Fanam was one tenth of Perta . All were of gold mixed with alloy . The Tar was a silver coin . The Jital was a copper
Golconda 1518 .
Quli Qutub Qutub Shah Shahi 1526-27 Amir Ali Barid . Barid Shahi
1687
( Aurangzeb )
Bidar
1610 ( Bijapur )
Ibrahim Adil Shah , the greatest ruler of Adil Shahi dynasty , introduced Dakhini in place of Persian as court language . Gol . Gumbaj was built by Muhammad Adil Shah ; it is famous for the so - called ' Whispering Gallery ' . Gol Gumbaj was designed by Yaqut of Dabul .
coin . Society
It was the only empire in Medieval India which employed women in the state services . Women even went to battles . Also , it was the only state that promoted widow remarriage . Status of women improved during na_kiran Muhammad Quli Qutub Shah was the greatest ruler of
Quli Qutub Shah built the famous Golconda Fort .
( a )
this time .
Qutub Shahi dynasty and it was he who founded the city of Hyderabad originally known as Bhagyanagar after the name of the Sultan's favourite , Bhagyamati : and he also built the famous Charminar . Other Provincial Kingdoms
Viprulu : Brahmins , Rajulu : Kshatriya , Nalavajativaru : Shudras Vipravinodins : Artisans , Kaikollas : Weavers , • Sahagaman : Sati , Besabaga : Forced labour . Architecture The ruins of the Vijaynagar at Hampi were brought to light in 1800 by an engineer of English East India Company named colonel Colin Mackenzie . The Vijayanagar rulers produced a new style of architecture called Provida style . The large number and prominence of pillars and piers are some of the distinct features . Horse was the most common animal on the pillars . Another important features were the Mandapa or open pavilion with a raised platform , meant for seating deities and Amman Shrine . Important temples were Vithalswami and Hazara Rama Temple at Hampi , Tadapatri and Parvati temples at Chidambaram and Varadraja and Ekambarnath temples at Kanchipuram . The Vijayanagar rulers started the practice of inscribing the stories of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata on the walls of the various temples . Vithalswami and Hazara Rama Temple are examples of this type of wall . inscription .
Founder
Capital
Kingdon
Malik Sarwar ( Khwaja Jaha )
Jaunpur Jaunpur ( Sharqui )
Dilawar Khan Ghori :
Malwa
Dhar , Mandu
Ahmadabad
Gujarat Bengal
Ahmad Jafar Khan , Muzaffar Shah
Lakhnauti , Pandua , Shamsuddin Iliyas Shah Ekdala Khandesh Burhanpur and Malik Raza Faruqui
Asirgadh

12. Religious Movements in 15th - 16th Centuries .
I. Bhakti Movement
The Bhakti movement was based on the doctrine that the relationship between God and man is through love and worship rather than through performing any ritual . or religious ceremonies . It was in South India for the first time that Bhakti movement grew from a mere religious doctrine to a broad based popular movement based on social and religious equality . It was led by popular saint poets called ' Alvars , who represented emotional side of Vaishnavism through collective songs called Prabandhas , It declined after the 10th ' century . Join on Telegram @apna channels
Bahmani Kingdom
Alauddin Hasan Bahman Shah ( 1347-58 ) : He was also known as Hasan Gangu . He founded the Bahmani kingdom with its capital at Gulbarga ( First capital ) .

13. Mughal Period ( 1526-40 and 1555-18
Babur : 1526-30
The foundation of the Mughal rule in India was laid by
Babur in 1526 .
He was a descendant of Timur ( from the side of his father ) and Chengiz Khan ( from the side of his mother ) . Babur defeated Ibrahim Lodhi in the first battle of Panipat on April 21 , 1526 and established Mughal dynasty which lasted till the establishment of British ´rule in India . In 1527 , he defeated Rana Sanga of Mewar at Khanwa In 1528 , he defeated Medini Rai of Chaneri at Chanderi In 1529 , he defeated Muhammad Lodhi ( uncle of Ibrahim Lodhi ) at Ghaghra , In 1530 , he died at Agra . His tomb is at Kabul . He adopted Tughluma and flanking party system and was the first to use gunpowder and artillery in India . He wrote his autobiography Tuzuk - i - Baburi in Turki in which he gives an excellent account of India and his empire . Tuzuk - i - Baburi was translated into Persian ( named Baburnama ) by Abdur Rahim Khanekhana and in English by Madam Bevridge . He compiled two anthologies of poems , Diwan ( in Turki ) and Mubaiyan ( in Persian ) . He also wrote Risal- i - Usaz or letters of Babur . Humayun : 1530-40 and 1555-56 ...
Shah Nayamatu llah Qadiri and Shah Abdullah Shuttari ( 15th Century ) : Shah Nayamatullah Qadiri founded the Qadiriya order and Shah Abdullah Shuttari ( d . 1458 ) founded the Shuttari order . The former spreader in Uttar Pradesh and Deccan , while he later spreads mainly in Madhya pradesh and Gujarat_kiran :: Miyan Mir ( 1550-1635 ) was the most popular Sufi saint of the Qadiriya order . Khwaja Bagi Billah ( 1536-1603 ) Founded the Naqsbandiah order and its most famous saint was Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi ( d.1625 ) known as Mujaddid

1530. His succession was challenged by his brothers Kamran , Hindal and Askari alongwith the Afghans . He fought two battles against Sher Shahat Chausa ( 1539 ) and at Kannauj / Bilgram ( 1540 ) and was completely defeated by him . ➤ He was the son of Babur and ascended the throne in He escaped to Iran where he passed 12 years of his life in exile . After Sher Shah's death Humayun invaded India in 1555 and defeated his brothers the Afghans . He once again became the ruler of India . He died while climbing down the stairs of his library ( at Din Panah ) in 1556 and was buried in Delhi . British orienatalist Lane Poole remarked on Humayun's misfortune : " Humayun tumbled through life , and he tumbled out of it ” . His sister , Gulbadan Begum , wrote his biography Humayunama . He built Din Panah at Delhi as his second capital . Sur Empire ( Second Afghan Empire ) : 1540-55 Sher Shah : 1540-45 He was the son of Hasan Khan , the Jagirdar of Sasaram Ibrahim Lodhi transferred his father's jagir to him . In 1527-28 , he joined Babur's service and then returned to South Bihar as deputy governor and guardian the minor king Jalal Khan Lohani , son of Bahar Khan Lohani . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Alif .
Sul Words Tasawwuf
Meaning
Sufism
Shaikh / Pir / Murshid Spiritual teacher
Murid
Disciple
Khalifah
Successor .
The hospice
Khangah
Sama
Musical recital
Raksa
Dance
Self annihilation
Fana
Pilgrimage to the tombs of Sufi saints Achievements of Bhakti and Sufi Movements
1. They influenced each other and inherited from each other
2. Bhaktism reformed Hinduism and Sufism liberalised Islam
3. Both put breaks on orthodoxy .
4. Both encouraged social reform measures
Ziyarat

5. Atmosphere of inter - religious fraternity was created . Hindu and Muslims reconciled 6. Development of regional languages 7. A cultural synthesis took place which transformed a Muslim rule in India to a national govt . under Akbar .

14. Maratha State ( 1674-1720 ) and Maratha Confederacy ( 1720-1818 ) .
Raja Jai Singh of Amber was then appointed by . Aurangzeb to put down Shivaji ( 1665 ) . Jai Singh succeeded in beseiging Shivaji in the fort of Purandhar . Consequently the treaty of Purandhar ( 1665 ) was signed according to which Shivaji ceded some forts to the Mughals and paid a visit to the Mughal court at Agra . In 1674 Shivaji was coronated at capital Raigarh and assumed the title of Haindava Dharmodharak ( Protector of Hinduism ) .. After that Chhatrapati Shivaji continued the struggle with Mughals and Siddis ( Janjira ) . He conquested Karnataka during 1677-80 .
Maratha State : 1674-1720 Shivaji : 1674-80 Born at Shivneri Fort in 1630 . Father - Shahji Bhonsle , Mother - Jija Bai , Religious Teacher - Samarth Ramdas Shivaji inherited the Jagir of Poona from his father in 1637 . > After the death of his guardian , Dadaji Kondadev , in 1647 , he assumed full charge of his Jagir . He conquered many Forts viz . Singh Garh / Kondana : ( 1643 ) , Rohind and Chakan ( 1644-45 ) , Toran ( 1646 ) , Purandhar ( 1648 ) , Rajgarh / Raigarh ( 1656 ) , Supa ( 1656 ) and Panhala ( 1659 ) . Afzal Khanwas deputed by Adil Shah ( Ruler of Bijapur ) to punish Shivaji ; but the later Afzal Khan was killed by Shivaji in 1659. - - Shaista Khan , governor of Deccan was deputed by Aurangzeb to put down the rising power of Shivaji in 1660. Shivaji lost Poona and suffered several defeats Khan ( 1663 ) and
Shivaji's Administration
Shivaji divided his territory under his rule ( Swaraj ) into three provinces , each under a viceroy . Provinces were divided into prants which were subdivided into parganas or tarafs . The lowest unit was village headed by Patel ( Headman ) . Shivaji was helped by the ashtapradhan ( eight minister ) which was unlike a collective of ministers , for there was weno collective responsibility ; each minister was directly till he made a bölå ſtack on Shaistaregram @apna channels
plundered Surat ( 1664 ) and rater

16. Expansion of British Power ( In the context of Bengal , Mysore , Punjab etc. ) Bengal Murshild Quli Khan ( 1717-27 ) : In 1717 , Murshid Quli Khan was appointed as Bengal's Subedar i.e. governor by Mughal emperor Farrukh Siyar . Grant of the Governorship of Orissa also to him by Farrukh Siyar in 1719. He transferred the capital of Bengal from Dacca to Murshidabad
Clive concluded two separate treaties of Allahabad with Shah Alam II ( 12 Aug. , 1765 ) and Shujauddaula : ( 16 Aug. , 1765 ) . Join on Telegram @apna channels

1. It stunted the growth of Indian enterprise and checked and retarded capital formation in India .
2. If financed capitalist development in Britain .
3. India was kept as a zone of free trade without allowing it to develop the ability to compete . Plantations , mines , jutemills , banking , shipping , export- Import concerns promoted a system of interlocking capitalist firms managed by foreigners . It drained resources from India .
kiran ,

4. The stability of the Indian villages was shaken and the entire set up of the rural society began to break up . up .
Peasant Movements
Leaders
Year
Movement Place Indigo Revolt Bengal Pabna
1859 Bishnu and Digambar Biswas 1870 Ishwar Roy , Sabu Pal , Khoodi Mollah
Bengal
Deccan Riots Maharashtra 1875
Land Revenue Systems
Maharashtra 1879 Vasudev Balwant Phadke
Ramosi : Movement
Permanent Settlement / Istamarari ( Sthayi ) Bandobast Introduced in Bengal , Bihar , Orissa and districts of Benaras and Northern districts of Madras by : Lord Cornwallisin 1793 . John Shoreplanned the Permanent Settlement . It declared zamindars as the owners of the land . Hence , they could keep 1 / 11th of the revenue collected to themselves while the British got a fixed share of 10 / 11th of the revenue collected . The zamindars were free to fix the rents .. Assured of their ownership , many zamindars stayed in towns ( absentee landlordism ) and exploited their tenants . Ryotwari System It was introduced in Bombay and Madras in 1820 . Thomas Munr ( Governor of Madras ) and Charles Reed recommended it . In this , a direct settlement was made between the government and the ryot ( cultivator ) .
1913 Sitaram Das , Vijay Pathik Singh 1917 Gandhiji
Rajasthan Bihar
Bijolia
Champaran
1918 Gandhijiand Vallabh Bhai Patel 1921 Sayyad Ali and Sayyid Fazl
Gujarat Kerala Bordoli / Borsad Gujarat Tebhaga Bengal Punnapra- Kerala Waylar Telengana Andhra P UP . Kisan Sabha UP
Kheda Moplah
1928 Vallabh Bhai Patel 1946 Kamparan Singh , Nyamat All
1946
1946 Kumaraiya and Sundaraiya 1918 Indra Narayan Dwivedi and Gauri Shankar Mishra 1920 Baba Ramachandra
Avadh Kisan UP . Sabha Eka Movement Avadh . Forest Satyagrah South India All India Kisan Lucknow Sabha
1921 Madari Pasi 1931 NV Rama Naldu , NG Rang 1936 Sahajanada Saraswati
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

18. Socio - Religious Movements in 19th - 20th Centuries Socio - Religious Movements and Organisations
Tribe Chuar
Year
Leaders
1766-72 Raja Jagannath
Excess Revenue
demand , Bengal famine Agrarian hardship British occupation Singhbhum
Founder
Mame of the Organisation
Plac
Bhills
1817 Sewaram
Rammohan Roy
1815 Calcutta Atmiya Sabha 1828 Calcutta Brahmo Samaj ... 11829 Calculta Dharma Sabha 1839 Calcutta Tattvabodhini Sabha
1820
Rammohan Roy :
Radhakant Dev Debendranath Tagore
Ramosi
1822
Chittur
Singh , British Rule
Pratap Singh , Dattaraya Patkar
Nirankaris
Dayal Das ,
Darbara
1840 Punjab
1824
Dismantle of forests
Kolis
Singh , Rattan Chand etc.
British occupation
Manav Dharma Sabha
Durgaram Mancharam
Ahom
1828-33 Gomadhar
1844 Surat 1849 Bombay Paramhansa Mandli
Kunwara
Dadoba Pandurang
1829-32 Tiruth Singh
British occupation Land transferto outside British Rule For Dharma Raj against ban Joria Bhagat on grazing and timber Installation of British . protege on throne British intervention
Khasi
Ram Singh
1857 Punjab 1861 Aura 1866 Calcutta Brahmo Samaj of India 1866 Deoband Dar - ul - Ulum 1867 Bombay Prarthna Samaj 1875 Bombay Arya Samaj Namdharis Radha Swami Satsang
Kol Santhals
1831-32 Buddhu Bhagat 1855-56 Sidhu and Kanhu 1858 Rup Singh
Tulsi Ram
Keshab Chandra Sen Maulana Hussain Ahme Atmaram Pandurang Swami Dayanand Saraswati Madam H.P Blavatsky and Col HS . Olcott
Näikda
Bhuyan and 1867-68 Ratna Nayak` . Juang
1891 Dhami Nayak
1875 New York Theosophical Society ( USA ) 1878 Calcutta Sadharan Brahmo Samaj
Sambhuden
Kacha Nagas 1882
བཅའ་ བ་ ་
Land system , Missionary activity and forced labour temperance and purification movement
Birsa Munda
Munda
Anand Mohan Bose
1899
( Ulgulan )
G.G. Agarkar
Deccani Education
1884 Pune
Bhills
Society .
( Poona )
Govind Guru -
1913
Syed Ahmad Khan
Muhammadan
1886 Aligarh
Educational Conference
Oraons 1914 Jatra Bhagat and Religious Reason
@apna
( TanaBhagat ) .
other Bhagats
M.G. Ranade
1887 : Bombay Indian National : Conference
Chenchus 1921-22
British control of forests
1887 Lahore Deva Samaj
Shivnarayan Agnihotri
Koyas / 1922-24 Alluri Sitaram Raju British Rule
9 .
Maulana Shibli Numani
1894 Lucknow Nadwah - ul - Ulama
Rampas Jaga
1932 Jadunang ( 1905-31 ) A reformist movement and Rani Gaidinliu later directed against excess of British rule Civil Revolts Sanyasi ( Bengal , 1780 ) : led by religious monks against :: British restrictions and ruin of peasantry . .. Kattabomman Revolt ( 1792-98 ) : by Vira Pandya Kattabomman against imposition of British Suzerainty . Velu Thampi ( Travancore , 1805 ) : led by Velu Thampi ´against British extortions . Paik Revolt ( Orissa , 1817-18 ) : led by Bakshi Jagabandhu against British occupation and revenue policy .. Kittur Revolt ( Karnataka , 1824 ) : by Chinnama and Ryappa against British interference in Kittur . Pagal Panthis ( Maimansinh , 1825-33 ) : by Karam Shah and Tipu . Religious nature . Raju ( Vizag , 1827 ) : by Birabhadra Raju .
1897 Belur
Ramakrishna Mission : Swami Vivekanand
Servents of Society
1905 Bombay
Indian Gopal Krishna Gokhale
Mrs Ramabal Ranade and G.K. Devadhar 1911 Bombay Social Service League NM . Joshi 1914 Allahabad Seva Samiti HN . Kunzru
Poona Seva Sadan
1909 Pune
( Poona )
Important Socio - Religious Reformers Swami Sahajanand ( 1781-1830 ) : His original name being Gyanashyama , founded the Swaminarayan sect in Gujarat , which believed in a theistic God and prescribed a moral code for its followers . _ Raja Rammohan Roy ( 1772-1833 ) : Bom in 1772 at . Radhanagar in Hoogly district ( West Bengal ) founded Atmiya Sabha în Calcutta in 1815 to propagate monotheism¨ : and reforms in the Hindu society . The Atmiya Sabha was named Brahmo Sabha and finally Brahmo Samaj in 1828 . Launched a movement for the abolition of Sati through his Faraizi ( 1838 ) : by Haji Saraitullah and Dadu Mian for journal Sabad Kaumudi ( 1819 ) .
Debendranath Tagore ( 1817-1905 ) : Took over the leadership of the Brahmo Samaj after Raja Rammohan Roy . Founded Tattyabodhini Sabha in 1839 and published : Tattvabodhini Patrika , a Bengali monthly to propagate the ideas of Raja Rammohan Roy . In 1859 , the Tattvabodhini Sabha was amalgamated with the Brahmo Samaj . He compiled selected passages from the Upanishads , which to be known as Polígar ( Kangol 1846 ) by Varas e Regram @ajona channels
câuse of tenants .
Satavandi ( Maharashtra , 1839 ) by Phond Savant and Anna Sahib against British rule . Kuka ( 1840 ) ; by Bhagat Jawahar Mal or Sian Saheb in ¡ Punjab . Gadakari ( 1844 ) : against revenue policy in Kolhapur . Narasimha Reddy .
Join on

19. Freedom Struggle .
Within a month of the capture of Delhi , the revolt spread to the different parts of India ( esp . all over the North India , Central India and Western India ) . South remained quiet and Punjab and Bengal were , only marginally affected . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
L The Revolt of 1857 .
The Revolt of 1857 is an important landmark in the history of India which occurred during the governor- generalship of Lord canning .

1. Bahadur Shah II : was Deported to Rangoon , where he died in 1862. His sons were dead ; Nana Sahib ( original name Dhundhu Pant ) , Begum Hazrat Mahal and Khan Bahadur Khan : Escaped to Nepal ; Tantiya Tope ( Original name - Ramchandra Pandurang ) was captured and executed on 15th April , 1859 ; Rani Laxmi Bai : Died in the battle - field ; Kuer Singh : was wounded and died on 26 April , 1858 .
" It was wholly unpatriotic and selfish Sepoy Mutiny with no native leadership and no popular support .
John Seeley
" The so - called First National War of Independence is . neither ' First , nor National ' , nor a war of Independence . " R.C. Mazumdar " A national revolt rooted in deep mistrust . " Benjamin Disraely ( Opposition Leader ) The Revoltof 1857 was the First war of Independence . " V.D. Savarkar " What began as a fight for religion ended as a war for **** S.N . Sen independence . " Impact of the Revolt of 1857
1. In August 1858 , the British parliament passed an act , which put an end to the rule of the Company . The control of the British government in India was transferred from the company to The British Crown ..
2. A. minister of the British government , called the Secretary of state for India was made responsible for the governance of India .
3. The British Governor - General of India was now also given the title of Viceroy , who was also the represen- tative of the monarch .
4. Marked the end of British Imperialism and Princely . States were assured against annexation . Doctrine of Lapse was withdrawn . @apna_kirand rule . 5. After the revolt , the British pursued the policy of divide

2. Sir Huge Rose described Laxmi Bai as ' the best and bravest military leader of the rebel ' .
3. Other Important Leaders : Khan Bahadur Khan ( Bareilly ) , Maulavi Ahmadullah , Shah alias , Danka Shah ( Faizabad ) , Azimullah Khan ( Fatehpur ) , Devi Singh ( Mathura ) , Kadam Singh ( Merrut ) etc.
4. English authority re - established in India during July - Dec . 1858 . Causes of Failure : The Revoltof 1857 was an unsuccessful but was a heroic effort to eliminate foreign rule . The main causes were :
1. Disunity of Indians and poor organisation
2. Lack of complete nationalism - Scindias , Holkars , Nizam and others actively helped the British
3. Lack of coordination between sepoys , peasants , zamindars and other classes 4 . Many had different motives for participating in the revolt .. Significance : The important element in the revolt lay in Hindu - Muslim unity . People exhibited patriotic sentiment without any touch of communal feelings . It no doubt began as a mutiny of soldiers , but soon turned into a revolt against the British rule in general . Nature of the Revolt of 1857

6. Far - reaching changes were made in the administration and increase of white soldiers in the army .. 7. Total expense of the suppression was thrown on the Indian people .
> There are two main views about the nature of the Revolt of 1857 :
1. Sepoy Mutiny : Syed Ahmed Khan , Munshi Jeevan Lal and Durgadas Bandyopadhyaya ( Contemporary Historians ) ; Stenley ( Secretary of state for India ) , John Lowerence , John Seeley , Malleson , R.C. Mazumdar . National Struggle / War of Independence : Benjamin Disraely , Karl Marx , V.D. Savarkar , K.M. Pannikar , Ishwari Prasad , A.L. Shrivastva , Tarachand .

8. The revolt had brought in its trail a difficult financial problem . The Government was burdened with a heavy debt . Two British financial exepert , James Wilson arid Samuel Leing , cut down government expenditure and introduced an income tax ( ) , a paper currency ( ) and annual budget ( ) . With these measures the dificit was converted into a surplus by 1861 . 9. It has been said that Julius Caesar dead was more powerful than Julius Caesar alive . The same may be said about the Revolt of 1857. Whatever might have been its original character , it soon became a symbol of challenge to the mighty British empire in India and remained a shining star for the rise and growth of the Indian national movement . · 19. II Moderate Phase ( 1885-1905 ) Important Organisations Before Congress
2 .
> Other views ::
Racial Struggle / Black - White Struggle : -Medley ; Religious Struggle / Hindu - Muslim - Christian Struggle
-Rees ;
Civilisation - Barbarism Conflict / English - Indian Conflict -T.R. Holmes ; Hindu - Muslim Conspiracy against Christians -Outram and Taylor .
Important Books on 1857
Year Author
Book
The First Indian War of Independence 1859 Karl Marx
Founders ) Calcutta : 1838 Dwarka Nath Tagor London , 1839 William Adam Calcutta 1851 Devendra Nath Tagore
Place
+ 1857-59 .
Organisation Landholders Society British India Society British India Association ( Result of the merger of 1 and 2 ) Madras Native Association
1873 Sayed Ahmad Khan 1909 V.D. Savarkar
Causes of Indian Revolt
The India War of Independence
The Sepoy Mutiny and the rebellion of 1957 RC . Mazumdar
1857
Civil Rebellion in Indian Mutini Rebellion , 1857 : A Symposium
1957 SB Chowdhury .
Madras 1852 CY
1957 P.C.Toshi 1957 5.N.Sen
1857
Join on Telegram @apna channels

2. Lala Lajpat Rai : Extremist from Punjab . Under the influence of Arya Samaj he founded National School at Lahore . He presided over the AITUC in 1920. Boycotted Simon Commission and demonstrated against it at Lahore during which he was brutally assaulted by the police and subsequently succumbed to his injuries .
3. Bipin Chandra Pal : Discarded orthodox Hinduism and entered Brahmo Samaj and visited England and · America . He founded English weekly New India . He led the Swadeshi movement . He carried gospels of Boycott , Swadeshi , National Education , Swaraj and the Passive Resistance . He founded Vande Matram .
4. Sri Aurobindo Ghosh : He passed ICS exam with record marks in Greek and Latin . He had a European upbringing . He worked for secret societies in Bengal and Maharashtra . He started Bengali daily Jugantar . He wrote seditious articles in Vande Matram . He was put to trial for Maniktalla ( Calcutta ) Bomb Conspiracy Case He finally retired to the life of Yoga at Pondicherry .. Other Extremist Leaders : Chakravarthi Vij Raghvachariar , Aswini Kumar Dutta , Raj Narayan Bose , T. Prakasham , Chidambaram Pillai etc. Methods of Extremists :
1. Passive Resistance i.e. non - cooperating with the British Government by boycotting government service , courts schools and colleges .
2. Promotion of Swadeshi and boycott of foreign goods Join on Telegram @apna_channels
It was attended by 72 delegates from all over India . From 1885 onwards the INC met every year and its cause spread rapidly among middle class Indians . With the foundation of INC in 1885 , the struggle for India's independence was launched in a small , hesitant and mild but organized manner . The first two decade of INC are described in history as those of moderate demands and a sense of confidence in British justice and generosity . Their aim was not to be aggressive for attaining independence lest the British should suppress this . This resulted in Indian Council Act in 1892 which allowed some members to be indirectly elected by Indians but keeping the official majority intact . Moderate Leaders : Dada Bhai Naoroji , A.O. Hume , Badruddin . Tayebji , M.G. Ranade , W.C. Bannerji , Ferozshah Mehta , Surendra Nath Bannerji , C.Shankaran Naiyar , Madan Mohan Malviya , V.S. Shrinivas Shastri , Tej Bahadur Sapru , Gopal Krishna Gokhale , Anand Mohan Bose , E. Dinesh Wacha , Ras Bihari Ghosh , Mohan Lal Ghosh , P. Anand Charlu , C.Y. Chintamani , R.C. Dutt , S. Subrahmanyam Aiyer , K.T. Tailang , Madhusudan Das , Rahimtulla M. Sayani : Select Opinions about INC INC represents only a microscopic minority . Lord Dufferin ( 1884-88 ) ( Contemporary Viceroy )

19. IV . The Gandhian Era ( 1917-47 ) Mahatma Gandhi ( 1869-1948 ) : Chronological Overview
( Later Poona ) .
Pramath Nath Mitra Vinayak Damodar ( V.D. ) Savarkar 1905 Ashwini Kumar Dutta
Midnapur 1902
Anushilan Samiti
1904
Poona
Abhinava Bharata ·
In South Africa : 1893-1914 1893 Departure of Gandhi to South Africa , Experiences racial discrimination in various forms ; a famous incidence Gandhi was thrown off the first class compartment of the train at Pietermaritaburg station ( 07 June ) Foundation of Natal Indian Congress . Foundation of Indian Ambulance Core during Boer Wars : Foundation of Indian Opinion ( magazine ) and Phoenix Farm at Phoenix near Durban . First Civil Disobedience Movement ( Satyagraha ) against Asiatic Ordinance in Transvaal . 1907 Satyagraha against Compulsory Registration and Passes for Asians ( The Black Act ) in Transvaal .
Warisal
Swadesh Bandhav
Samiti
Pulin Bihari Das . Ajit Singh , Sufi Amba Prasad
1907
Anushilan Samiti
Dacca
Bharat Mata Society : Punjab
1907
Hindustan Republican Kanpur .
Sachindra Nath Sanyal
1924
Association / Army .
( H.RA. )
1926 Bhagat Singh
Lahore
Bharat Naujawan
Sabha
1928 Chandrashekhar Azad
Hindustan Socialist Delhi
Republican
Association / Army
( H.S.RA )
Trialandimprisonment - Johannesburg Jail ( FirstJail Term ) Foundation of Tolstoy Farm ( Later Gandhi Ashrama ) near Johannesburg ... 1913 Satyagraha against derecognition of non Christian marriages in Cape Town . 1914 Quits South Africa forever and returns to India , Awarded Kaisar - i - Hind for raising an Indian Ambulance Core during Boer wars .
1908 1910
Indian Revolutionary Organisations ( Abroad )
Organisation
Place Year Founder
India Home Rule
London
1904 Shyamji Krishna Verma
Society ( India House )
Abhinava Bharat .
London
1906 Vinayak Damodar
Savarkar 1907 Tarak Nath Das
California ( USA ) San Fransico 1913 Lala Hardayal
Indian Independence
League
MATE
In India : 1915-48
Gadar Party :
Arrived in Bombay ( India ) on 9 Jan , 1915 ; Foundation of Satyagraha Ashrama at Kocharab near Ahmedabad ( 20 May ) ; In 1917 , Ashrama shifted at the banks Sabarmati ; All India tour . Delivered a speech on the occassion of opening ceromony of Banaras Hindu University - BHU ( 04 Feb. ) , Abstain from active politics ( though he attended Lucknow session of INC held in 26-30 Dec. , 1916 , where Raj KumarShukla a cultivator from Bihar , requested him to come to Champaran . ) Gandhi entered active politics with Champaran campaig toredress grievances of the cultivators oppressed by Indigy planters of Bihar ( April 1917 ) . Champaran Satyagraha was his first Civil Disobedience Movement in India . 1918 In Feb. 1918. Gandhi launched the struggle in Ahmedaba „ which involved industrial workers . Hunger strike as weapon was used for the first time by Gandhi during Ahmedabad struggle . In March 1918 , Gandhi worked fo peasants of Kheda in Gujarat who were facing difficulties in paying the rent owing to failure of crops . Kheda Satyagraha was his first Non - Cooperation Movement . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
1915
Indian Independence Berlin 1914 Lala Hardayal and
Virendra Nath Chattopadhyaya
League
( Germany )
1915 Raja Mahendra Pratap
Indian Independence Kabul
$ 1916
League and Government
Revolutionary Events / Cases
Place
Year Accused
Name of the Event / Case

1897.0

7. Chapekar
Murder of Rand and Amherst Poona
( Plague Commissioners )
Brothers , Damodar and Balkrishna
$ 1917
Attempt to murder Kingsford Muzaffarpur 1908 Khudiram Bose
( a Vindictive Judge )
and Prafulla Chaki
Manikatalla ( Calcutta ) and Manikatalla , 1908 Aurobindo Alipur Bomb Conspiracy Case ( Calcutta )
Ghosh
Alipur
Murder of Jackson ( District Nasik Magistrate ) Murder of Curzon Willie's London
1909 Anant Kanhere
1909 Madan Lal Dhingra

1. Mesopotamian Civilization Iraq
Tigris and
( 4000 BC 6Cen . BC ) :
Euphrates Nile
Egyptian Civilization > Egypt is called the Gift of the Nile . Historians divide the history of Egypt into three periods : the Old Kingdom , the Middle Kingdom and the New Kingdom . The Old Kingdomis also called the Age of the Pyramids . The Egyptian king was called the pharaoh . The Egyptians were worshippers of nature and the sun was their most important god . The Egyptians believed that after death both the body and the soul live while other people believed that only the soul lives and the body perishes . So the Egyptians : took great care in preserving the body of the dead . The body was embalmed in spices and then wrapped in stripes of fine linen . Such a preserved body is called a mummy . The mummy was put in a wooden box and buried .

2. Egyptian Civilization
Egypt
( 3400 BC - 1000 BC ) . Harappan Civilization ( 2500 BC 1750 BC ) Chinese Civilization ( 1765 BC - 250 BC )
India and Pakistan Indus
China ;
Hwang - Ho
Mesopotamian Civilization : The Oldest .. Civilization of the World Mesopotamia means land between the rivers ' . Mesopotamia is the land between the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers . Mesopotamia comprises four regions : Sumer ( Southernmost region ) , Babylonia and Akkad ( middle region ) and Assyria ( Northernmost region ) . Hammurabi ( C.2100 BC ) , the greatest Babylonian
I ruler , united the whole of what is now called Iraqantona_kirane Pyramids and the Sphinx are the two specimens of
a single kingdom . Hammurabi gave his people a code of laws famous as ' Hammurabi's Code ' . His code covered every aspect of life . His code was based on the law of ' eye for eye ' and ' tooth for tooth ' i.e. , the law of ' tit for tat ' . The Hittites , who came from Asia Minor ( now Turkey ) and destroyed the Babylonian kingdom , were the first to make regular use of horses for war chariots and to make iron implements . " The potter's wheel was perhaps first used in Mesopotamia . The Mesopotamians also seem to have been the first to make glassware . The Sumerians were the first to evolve a proper system of writing . This system is called cuneiform . The cuneiform script was invented in
C. 3400 BC . This script is found on clay tablets . The cuneiform script was deciphered by Henry Rawlinson . The Mesopotamian system of counting is known as sexagesimal because the Mesopotamian people counted by sixties as we count by tens ( decimal system ) . Their sexagesimal system is no longer in use but we still use it as the basis of division of time Into minutes and seconds and of a circle into 360 degrees . In geometry , the Mesopotamians had discovered what was later called the Pythagoras ' theorem . In astronomy , the Mesopotamians made astonishing progress . They could calculate the length of the day and the night . They divided the whole day into 24 hours .
Egyptian architectural excellence . The Pyramids were the tombs of kings and they contained the mummies of these monarchs . The most imposing of all is the Great Pyramid at Gizeh in Cairo , built by the king Cheops ( Khufu ) of the old kingdom . The Great Pyramid is one of the seven wonders of the ancient world The Sphinx is a mythological animal with the body of a lion and the head of a man . Each Sphinx was carved out of a single solid rock . The Egyptian script , known as hieroglyphics , was invented in
C. 3100 BC . The script is found on papyrus sheets made of reeds . The Egyptian script - hieroglyphic script - was deciphered by Champollion . The Egyptians developed a decimal system of numeration . The crowning achievement of the Egyptians was the solar calendar .
Harappan Civilization
The Harappan Civilization extended over a bigger area than any of the contemporary civilization . Note : For Details , See Indus Civilization ' . Chinese Civilization The earliest Chinese civilization is the Shangcivilization . The Shang dynasty was overthrown by the Chou dynasty . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Colossus of Rhodes - 912 ft . high statue of Hellos , the stands at one side of the harbour Temple of Diana at Ephesus ( Rome ) . Mausoleum of Mausolus ( Ruler of Halicarnassus ) Medieval World : 500 AD - 1500 AD Medieval Europe
god ;
the state ' .
The period of Roman history beginning with his rule up to 284 AD is called ' the Principate ' . His rule and the - period following it were peaceful and are known in history as Pax Romana , which means ' Roman Peace ' . In 284 AD , Diocletian became the ruler . From this time on , Roman civilization declined more rapidly . One : of Diocletian's successors , Constantine , built a new capital called Constantinopole , on the site of ancient Byzantium , in 330 AD . Not long after , the Roman empire was divided into two empires - Western & Eastern . The Western part soon broke into many pieces . But the Eastern part called as Byzantine empire , continued for a thousand years more . The final blow came to the Roman empire at the hands of northern invaders , they were German tribes . By 476 476 AD , the once powerful Roman empire was no more . The Roman worshipped as many gods & goddesses as pina the Greeks . Jupitersent rain for the crops ; Marshelped them in war ; Mercury carried their messages ; Neptune , the god of sca ; Vestaguarded the home ; Junoprotected their women . Contributions of Roman Civilization Roman law and principles of governance are Rome's greatest contribution to the world . So complete was Rome's system of road linking all parts of the empire that people could say ' All roads lead to
The Eastern Roman empire or Byzantine empire was a vast empire and its capital Constantinople was the largest city of that time . The Byzantines built beautiful churches . The most famous of these is the Church of St. Sophia in Constantinople . This church was built during the reign of Byzantine emperor Justinian in the 6th century AD . The Ottoman Turks conquered the Byzantine territories
in 1453 .
Feudalism
> The word ' feudal ' comes from the word feud which originally meant a fief or land held on condition of
· service . In a feudal society , land was the source of power . Feudalism originated in the 8th & 9th centuries . First of all , the feudal system developed in western Europe .
:: ד .
The main division in feudal society was between ' feudal lords , who either got a share of the peasants ' produce or had peasants to work on their lands without any payment and ' Peasants ' , who worked on the land . Feudal Hierarchy :
1. Feudal Lords : ( a ) Kings ( b ) Dukes & Earls ( c ) Barons ( d ) Knights .
2. Peasants : three categories of peasants _ freeholders , villeins & serfs . In the feudal hierarchy , the king stood at the top and the peasant stood at the bottom . > The economic life under the feudal system was predominantly rural . The unit of land , which was like a village - farm , was called ' manor : " Crusades : 1095 AD - 1291 AD Crusades means the military expeditions , under the banner of the Cross , organised in western christendom primarily to recover the Holy Places of Palestine from Muslim occupation . > Four Crusades were fought by the European Christians to liberate Jerusalem from Seljuq Turks ( Muslims ) who did not permit Christian pilgrims to enter the holy land . Crusade ( 1095-99 ) was launched after the
Rome .....
The Romans developed their own alphabet and the Latin language became the language of all educated . people in western Europe . Latin words are still widely used in science , and Latin is the basis of several European languages esp . French , Spanish & Italian . Lucretius , Cicero , Marcus Aurelius & Seneca were the famous Roman philosophers . Horace ( ' Odes ' ) & Virgil ( ' Aeneid ' ) were the famous Roman poets . Tacitus ( ' Annals ' & ' Histories ' ) was the most famous Roman historian and Pliny , the elder , was the another famous Roman historian : The Romans were the inventors of concrete and could firmly cement bricks and stones together . They also introduced two architectural improvements the arch and cupolas or domes . Fights between gladiators or between a gladiator and a
The
Join on Telegram @apna channels

3. Economic Imperialism : It led to international rivalries . Every country tried to capture markets in every nook and comer of the world . This led to bitterness and heart- burning .
4. Anglo - German Rivalry & The Charter of William II : Anglo - German rivalry proved to be the main cause of World War I. Germany had become a great industrial country and wanted to have more markets for trade . Germany was jealous of the colonial and naval greatness of England . William II , emperor of Germany was very ambitious and wanted to gain influence in Turkey by linking Berlin with Baghdad by a railway line . This gave rise to a great rivalry between England and Germany . William II was arrogant ; haughty and ambitious . He wanted Germany to be the strongest power in the world ! He believed in the policy of ' world power or downfall " 5. Lack of International Organisation : There was lack of an International Organisation to control international : In 1848 revolts occurred in every German state and the rulers were forced to grant democratic constitutions . To unite Germany and to frame a constitution for the united Germany , a constituent assembly met in Frankfurt . The Frankfurt Assembly proposed the unification of Germany as a constitutional monarchy under the king of Prussia , who would become the emperor of of Prussia Join on Telegram @apna_channels

4. Inefficiency of League of Nations : Unfortunately , when hostility was growing between the two camps there was no effective international organisation which could bring the leaders of the two camps on a common platform and bring about a reconciliation between . them . The League of Nations was practically dead . 5. Colonial & Commercial Rivalry : The colonial and commercial rivalry between England and France on one side , and Germany and Italy on the other brought them in to conflict with each other .. 6. Aggressiveness of Berlin - Rome - Tokyo Axis : Hitler . had become very aggressive . He annexed the Saar Valley , occupied Rhineland and Austria , captured Chechoslovakia etc. Mussolini attacked Abyssinia ( Ethiopia ) Japan attacked China . This aggressive mood of the Fascist Powers got its fullest expression when they formed an Axis providing for mutual aid in the international sphere . Immediate Cause : The immediate cause of the war was the refuse of Poland to surender . Germany gave an ultimatum to Poland regarding : ( i ) surrender of the port of Danzig , ( ii ) the right of establishing a rail link between Germany and East Prussia through the Polish corridor . These two demands were rejected by Poland . So Germany invaded Poland on Sep. 1 , 1939. Britain and France as they were under treaty obligations to aid Poland , declared war against Germany on Sep. 3 , 1939 . Course of War : On one side were Germany , Italy and Japan , called the Axis Powers ( or Central Powers ) , and on the other were Great Britain , France , USSR , USA , China etc. called the Allied Powers ( or Allies ) . Germany had to face defeat once again . Hitler , Goebbels & Himmler committed suicide ( April 30 , 1945 ) and their successors surrendered unconditionally on May 7 , 1945 . After the fall of Germany , USA and UK concentrated their · focus against Japan . On Aug. 6 , 1915 , an atom bomb , ‘ Little “ Boy , was dropped on the city of Hiroshima . Japan was asked to surrender and when she refused another atom bomb , ' Fat Man ' , was dropped on Aug. 9 , 1945 , on the city of Nagasaki . It is estimated that more than one lakh persons were killed and leaving thousands more slowly dying of radiation poisoning . On Aug. 14 , 1945 , Japan conveyed its acceptance of the Allied demand to surrender but the actual surrender took place on Sep. 2 , 1945. With the Japanese surrender , the Second World War came to an end .
Militarism in Japan
➤ During the 20 years after Mussolini's March on Rome ( 1922 ) , many other countries , faced with severe economic problems , followed the examples of Italy and Germany and turned to fascism or right - wing nationalism . In Japan the democratically elected government , increasingly embarrassed by economic , financial and political problems , fell under the influence of the in the early 1930s .
army
The military soon involved Japan in war with China , and later took the country into the Second World War with its attack on Pearl Harbor ( 1941 ) . After a brilliant start , the Japanese eventually suffered on defeat and devastation when the two atomic bombs were dropped . After the Second World War , Japan returned to democracy and made a remarkable recovery , soon becoming one of the world's most powerful states . economically . SECOND WORLD WAR : Sep. 1 , 1939 - Sep. 2 , 1945 Causes : The causes of Second World War are as under-
1. The Treaty of Versailles ( 1919 ) : The Treaty of Versailles had in itself the germs of the Second World War . The Germany was very badly treated . She was forced to sign the treaty at the point of a bayonet , in a spirit of revenge . To tear away the Treaty of Versailles , Hitlerjoined hands with Mussolini of Italy .
2. Nationalist Movements of Germany & Italy : The rise of the national movement in Germany & Italy added fuel to the fire . Although Hitler tried to assure the world that he meant peace , he could not conceal his ambition for long . He embarked on a career of aggression which ultimately led to war . The same was the case with Mussolini who had established his dictatorship in Italy in 1922 .
3. Conflict of Ideology between Dictatorship & Democracy : Countries like Germany , Italy & Japan represented the ideology of dictatorship while Great Britain , France & USA represented the ideology of democracy . Mussolini I described the conflict between the two ideologies thus : " The struggle between the two worlds can permit no compromise . Either we or they ' .
Effects of WW II :
1. After about 15 months of preparatory work , the peace treaties were given a final shape by the 21 participating countries and they were signed on Feb. 10 , 1947 , in Paris by the representatives of the five enemy states and the Allied Powers . As regards Germany she was occupied by the Big Four . After its fall in May , 1945 , it was divided into four zones , each of which was administered separately by one of the occupying powers . Berlin came under joint occupation . Ultimately out of one Germany came two countries - West . Germany and East Germany , Italy was also deprived of her colonies . As regards Japan , a peace treaty was signed with her at San Francisco in 1951.
2. The United Nation Organi- sation ( UNO ) was established in Oct. 24 , 1945.
3. The USA and USSR emerged as the two most powerful nations in the world .
4. The emergence of Russia ( USSR ) gave rise Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Jupiter 2 Saturn 5 Earth 6. Venus
7 Mars
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Venus
+ Mars 8. Saturn
1 Earth

2. Mercury
5 Neptune

7. Uranus Terrestrial Planets . 3 : Earth

6. Jupiter
Mercury

2. Venus

4. Mars
Jupiter Planes

3. Uranus
4. Neptune cording to increasing Revolution Period
2. Venus .
3. Earth .
2 Saturn
Mercury
4 Mars
Jupiter 6. Saturn ⠀⠀ **** Uranus Planets according to decreasing Revolu

8. Neptune
Venus

3. Earth
Mercury
Mars SNeptune
5 Jupiter

7. Uranus

6. Saturn
Pluto is not a Planet now On the basis of the new definition of planet given by the IAU ( International Astronomical Union ) , the world's top institution on space science research , leading astronomers participating in LAU's meet at Prague ( Czech Republic ) on August 24 , 2006 , declared that Pluto would no longer remain a planet . Under the LAU's new guidelines , the number of planets
Diameter Mass of planet ( Time taken to turn once on its of planet ( 105
No. of satellites or
Orbital Period ( Time taken for one . revolution around Sun )
Rotations Perod
Name Distance from
lie Sun
moons :
planet Mercury
None .
579x10 ° km 88 days : 108.2 × 10 ° km 224.7 days 149.6 × 10 ° km 365.26 days
' 0.330

1407.6 hours ( 58.6 days )
4,879 km

23.9 hours ( 23 hours 56 min 04 sec . ) . ¨ 12,756 km a_kiran
None
( - ) 5832.5 hours ( 243 days )

4.87
12,104 km

5.97

0.642

24.6 hours

228.0x10 km 687 days
6,792 km 1,42,984 km

778.5x10 km 4331 days ( 11.85 years ) Saturn 14320 × 10 ° km 10747 days ( 29.42 years ) 10.7 hours
.95 .
1898

9.9 hours
274
1,20,536 km 568
Uranus 2867.0x10 ° km . 30589 days ( 63.74 years ) Neptune 4515.0x 10 % km 59800 days ( 163.71 years )
( - ) 17.2 hours
51,118 km 860
102

16.1 hour

49.528 km
[ Source : NSSDCA , NASA ]
Meteors are fragments of rocks coming towards the earth , formed due to the collision of asteroids with one .another . Meteors are usually small , and due to the heat produced by air resistance , burn up before they reach the Earth's surface . When meteors are large and do not burn up completely , they land on the Earth's surface and are known as Meteorites . All meteorites are believed to originate in the asteroid belt , where a sudden collision may send them towards the Earth and the Earth's gravity attracts them towards its surface .
Asteroids ( or Planetoids ) Asteroids are also known as minor planets . They are objects that revolve around the Sun. They are mostly found between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter . They are a belt of debris which failed to assemble into planets and keeps on revolving around . the Sun. This has come to be called as ' asteroid belt .. More than 5000 asteroids have been identified . Asteroids may be spherical , elongated or irregular in shape .
****
All asteroids rotate on their axis , every 5 to 20 hours . Certain asteroids may have satellites . Trojan asteroids are found in two clouds moving in the orbit of Jupiter , one moving ahead of it and the other moving behind it . Scientists believe that these asteroids occupy a place where a planet could have existed but was prevented from its formation by the disruptive gravitational force of the nearby giant planet , Jupiter .
Comets :
Visitors of the Solar System , Comets ( the name deriva from the Latin words stella cometa meaning ' hairy star are among the most spectacular and unpredictab bodies in the Solar System . Comets move around the Sun in regular orbits , bu their orbits are elongated ellipses that it takes the hundreds and , sometimes even thousands of years 4 complete one revolution around the Sun. Join on Telegram @apna channels
Meteors and Meteorites Meteors and Meteorites are also called shooting stars .

5.9726 × 10²4 kg 108.321 x 1010 km³ . 5514 kg / m³ 51,00,66,000 sq.km. ∙ 14,84,29,000 sq.km ( 29.1 % ) 36,16,37,000 sq.km ( 70.9 % ) · 38,26,72,000 sq . km 29.78 km / sec
Mass Volume : Mean Density Total Surface area Total Land area Total Ocean area Total Water area Mean Orbital Velocity
Diameter
Equatorial diameter Equatorial radius
12,756 km
6,378.1 km
O ' , ' Polar diameter Polar radius Equatorial circumference . Polar circumference
12,713.6 km
6,356.8 km ( IUGG )
40,077 km 40,009 km
Important Facts of Earth Highest land point ( Mt. Everest , Nepal ) 8,850 m Lowest land point ( Dead Sea , between - 430 m / 1410 ft Jordan and Israel ) Greatest ocean depth ( Mariana Trench in 11,034 m . ( 36,201 ft ) . Pacific Ocean , near Japan ) Maximum distance from the Sun 152 million km ( approx . ) ( At Aphelion ) Minimum distance from the Sun 147 million km ( approx . ) ( At Perihelion ) prove beyond any doubt that the Earth is a sphereona_kiraThe mean distance from the Sun 14,95,98,262 km ( 1.0 AU )
The Earth as an Oblate Spheroid Refined measure- ments of the Earth have proved that the true form of the Earth resembles a sphere that has been compressed at the poles and made to bulge at the Equator . This form is known as an oblate spheroid . The various factors which make the earth suitable for life to evolve and survive are : The earth has all the essential elements like carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen and oxygen , which act as building block for the origin of life . The earth is neither too hot nor too cold . It has the right temperature range for carrying out the life sustaining chemical reactions . The earth has a lot of water in the form of lakes , rivers and oceans for the growth and Composition of Earth ( 16 ) survival of life . The earth has enough oxygen gas in its atmosphere for the survival of living beings through breathing . The earth has a protective blanket of ozone layer high up in its atmosphere to save
Average diameter of Earth is 12,742 km , which was first calculated by Eratosthenes , the Greek mathematician . 29.1 % of the total surface area of Earth is covered by continents ( land ) , while 70.9 % is covered by oceans . The total water area of the earth including the oceans , lakes , rivers , ice sheets and the water in the atmosphere is called hydrosphere and it covers about 71 % of the earth's surface . Continents of The World .
Asia , Africa , North America , South America , Europe , Australia and Antarctica are the seven continents ... Asia : The word ' Asia ' is derived from the word ' Asu ' ( of Hibru language ) , which literally means the rising sun ' . Asia is the largest of all the seven continents of the
$ 35
1 Iron 2 Oxygen
3. Silicon
· world .
With 44.6 million sq km area , it covers 30 % ( about one third ) of the land surface of the world . With 4,299 million people , it contains about 60 % of the world population and emerges as the most populou
Magnes
Nickel

2.4
Sulphur

1.9
Calcium

1.1
continent of the world .
life from harmful ultraviolet 8. Aluminium radiations coming from the 9. Others
This vast continent comprises the greatest diversity in 7 - terms of physical features , climate , vegetation , wildlif and people . It has the highest mountain peak on the Earth , Mous Everest ( 8850 m ) and the lowest point , the Dead Se ( 396.8 m below sea level ) . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

0.5
Sun.
Biodiversity changes increase towards equator . Biodiversity is the degree of variation of life . It is a measure of variety of organisms present in different ecosystems . It is richest in the tropics .

6. Humboldt or Peruvian Current 7 Alaska Current
Cold
Warm
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

9. Equatorial Counter Current
Warm

10. California Current
Cold

11. El Nino Current
Warm

12. Antarctica Circumpolar Current
Cold
10-15 %
$ 15 *
130 °

13. Tsushima Current
Warm

14. Antilles Current 15 : Brazilian Current
Equator :
Warm
Warm
South Pole

16. Florida Current
Warm

17. Labrador Current
Cold
Latitude

18. Gulf Stream
On a globe of the Earth ; lines of latitude are circles of different size . The longest is the equator , whose latitude is zero , while at the poles - at latitudes 90 ° north and 90 ° south ( or - 90 ° ) the circles shrink to a point .
Warm

19. Canary Current
Cold

20. Norwegian Current
Warm

21. Benguela Current
Cold
Longitude

22. Irminger Current
Warm
On the globe , lines of constant longitude ( ' meridians " ) extend from pole to pole . Every meridian must cross the equator . Since the equator is a circle , we can divide it - like any circle - into 360 . degrees , and the longitude of a point is then the marked value of that division where its meridian meets the equator . - For historical reasons , the longitude ( meridian ) passing the old Royal Astronomical Observatory in Greenwich , England , is the one chosen as zero longitude . Located at the eastern edge of London , the British capital , the observatory is now a public museum and a brass band stretching across its yard marks the ' prime meridian ' . kira line of longitude is also called a meridian , denved from the

23. Falkland Current
Cold
* Atlantic Ocean currents ] N
· Indian Ocean Currents Current
Nature

1. North Equatorial Current
Warm & Stableë Cold & Unstable Warm & Stable Warm
2 N - E Monsoon Current
3. Mozambique Current Somali Current Agulhas Current 6. Western Astralian Current 7. S - W Monsoon Current 8. South Indian Ocean Current Biosphere
Warm & Stable Cold & Stable Warm & Unstable Cold
@apna
Latin , from meri , a variation of medius which denotes middle and diem , meaning day . The word once meant " noon and times of the day before noon were known as ante meridian , while times after it were post meridian . Today's abbreviations amand p.m. come from these terms , and the Sun at noon was said to be passing meridian “ : All points on the same line of longitude experienced noon ( and any other hour ) at the same time and were therefore said to be on the same " mendian line Local Time ( LT ) and Time Zones > Two important concepts , related to latitude and ( especially ) longitude are Local Time ( LT ) and Universal Time ( UT ) : Longitudes are measured from zero to 180 ° east and 180 ° Newest ( or - 180 ° ) , and both 180 - degree longitudes share the same line , in the middle of the Pacific Ocean As the Earth rotates around its axis , at any moment one line of longitude " the noon meridian " faces the Sun , and at that moment , it will be noon everywhere on it . After 24 hours the Earth has undergone a full rotation with respect to the Sun , and the same meridian again faces noon . Thus each hour the Earth rotates by 360/24 = 15 degrees . The Date Line and Universal Time ( UT ) Longitude determines only the hour of the day - not the date , which is determined separately . The international date line has been established - most of it following the 180 th meridian - where by common agreement , whenever we cross it the date advances one day ( going west ) or goes back one day ( going east ) . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
" ་
> The part of the Earth where life exists is called the Biosphere ( ' bios ' means ' life ) . ➤ The Earth is the only planet of the solar system that supports life . Life is possible because of its unique lithosphere , hydrosphere and atmosphere . * Lithosphere The uppermost layer of the Earth's crust which is capable of supporting life is called Lithosphere . The Lithosphere ( or land ) covers two - sevenths or 29.22 % ( 14,90,41,182 sq . km ) of the total surface area of the earth .
Hydrosphere
Hydrosphere ( or sea ) covers five - sevenths or more accurately 70.78 % ( 36,10,59,226 sq . km ) of the total surface area of the earth ! Water is freely available in the gaseous , liquid and solid
state .
It is necessary for carrying out chemical reactions within the bodies of the living organisms . Water also dissolves and transports nutrients from the soil to the plants . It is used by plants for making food . Latitude and Longitude
Any location on Earth is described by two numbers - its latitude and its longitude

1. Nitrogen
3. Argon 5. Neon 7. Ozone

20.94 %
2 Oxygen Carbondioxide
On June 21 ; the earth is so located in its orbit that the sun is overhead on the Tropic of Cancer ( 23½ ° N ) . On this date the northern hemisphere is tipped towards the sun having the longest day , while the southern hemisphere is tipped away from the sun having the shortest day .

0.93 %

0.04 %

0.0005 %

0.0018 % 6. Helium

0.0006 % 8 Hydrogen

10.00005 %
⠀ Carbon dioxide is present in small quantity in the atmosphere .. It is an important constituent of air because it has the ability to absorb heat and thus keep the atmosphere . ana_kirawarm , thereby , balancing the heat of the earth .
Winter Solstice
On December 22 , the earth is in an equivalent position . on the opposite points in its orbit , so the southern hemisphere is tipped towards the sun and the northern hemisphere away from it . The sun is overhead on the Tropic of Capricorn ( 23½ ° S ) , resulting in the shortest day in the northern hemisphere .
> Water vapour is the most significant component of the atmosphere as far as its effect on weather is concerned although its quantity varies considerably from practically none ( 0 ) to up to about 4 % by volume .: Watervapour is the source of all clouds and precipitation . ( rain , hail storm etc ) . Water vapour , like carbon dioxide , has the ability to absorb heat energy . It also regulates the hydrological cycle . Dust intercepts and reflect incoming insolation . > The polluted particles present in the air not only absorb larger amount of insolation but also greatly absorb the terrestrial radiation . ☐☐ > Dust in the atmosphere contributes to the red and orange colour of sunrise and sunset .
Equinoxes
> Two days in a year when day and night are equal *** throughout the world are equinoxes . Falling midway between the dates of solstices , on these dates , the earth's axis lies at 90 ° to the line joining the centres of the earth and the sun and neither the northern nor the southern hemisphere is inclined towards the sun . The ' vernal equinox'occurs on March 21 and it is also called the spring equinox in the northern hemisphere . The autumnal equinox'occurs on September 23 . Midnight Sun This phenomenon is observed in the Arctic and Antarctic zones around mid - summer , when the sun does not sink below the horizon throughout 24 hours of the day and therefore , may be seen at midnight , This is the direct consequence of the inclination of the axis of the earth to the plane of the orbit . Norway is the place of midnight sun where the sun is continuously visible between May and July . In the southern hemisphere , the phenomenon is seen in the Antarctica continent , the ph
Layers of the Atmosphere There are five distinct layers of the atmosphere- ( a ) Troposphere , ( b ) Stratosphere , ( c ) Mesosphere , ( d ) Thermosphere and ( e ) Exosphere .
Troposphere
- This is the first layer of the atmosphere . According to Encyclopedia Britanica , it extends to a height of 18 km at the equator and 8 km at the poles . In this layer temperature decreases with height . This is due to the fact that the density of air decreases with height and so the heat absorbed is less . It contains more than 90 % of gases in the atmosphere . Since most of the water vapour form clouds in this layer , all weather changes occur in the troposphere ( tropo means change Join on Telegram @apna channels

6. Microbarovariograph
Winds
➤ Wind is the movement of air caused by the uneven heating of the Earth by the Sun.
Sometimes wind blows gently , refreshing us . At other times , it blows strongly creating storms that cause widespread damages . We need measurements of two quantities : direction and speed ; to give a description of the wind .. Wind Measurement Instruments Windvane or Weather - cock measures the wind - direction . Anemometer measures the wind velocity .
waves .
( c ) Sub - Tropical Westerly Jet Streams : These are found between 20 ° -35 ° N latitudes at a height of 10-14 km . The main reason behind their origin is the north - eastern flow of the air rising through the convection in the equatorial region in the Tropopause . These jet streams are responsible for bringing the western disturbances to India in the months from December to February . ( d ) Tropical Easterly Jet Streams : All the other jets follow a westerly direction , but , these jet streams follow the north - easterly direction . These jet streams found in the zone of 25 ° -35 ° N originate in the North Hemisphere in the summers . These jets originate in a zone of 100-150mb pressure at a height of 14-16km . This is responsible for the origin of the Indian monsoon . Since these jets are warm , they lift the hot and humid surface air and cause convectional rainfall and in this way jet streams is responsible for the bursting of monsoon in India . Climatic . Winds or Periodic Winds
Trade Winds
> They blow from the Sub - tropical High Pressure Belt to the Equatorial Low Pressure Belt in the tropics between 30 ° North and 30 ° South latitudes . TheyblowastheN.E.Tradesinthe Northern Hemisphere and as the S.E. , Trades in the Southern Hemisphere . The name Trade ' is derived Eye of Cyclone from a nautical expression The eye ' of cyclone has to blow tread ' meaning to abnormally high temperature blow along a regular path and lowest pressure .
n_kiran
or ' tread ' .
These winds change their direction along with change in time or change in climate . Land and sea breezes and the Monsoon winds are typical examples of periodic
Westerlies .
> They blow from the Sub - tropical high Pressure Belt to the Sub - polar low Pressure Belt in the temperate latitudes between 30 ° and 60 ° , on either side of the Equator . They are more constant and stronger in the Southern Hemisphere because there are no large landmasses to interrupt them .. In places they become so strong that these winds are known as the Roaring Forties or the Brave West Winds and the Furious Fifties . The belts of the Westerlies move north and south following the Sun's movement . These are known as Westerlies because they blow out of the west . Polar Winds They blow from the Polar High Pressure Belt to the Sub- polar Low Pressure Belt between latitudes 60 ° and the poles on both sides of the Equator .. These winds blow from the eastto form the Polar Easterlies They are more regular in the Southern Hemisphere . Polar winds are extremely cold and dry .
winds .
Monsoon Winds .
Monsoon winds are seasonal winds characterised by a complete reversal in their direction from one season to another . They blow from the sea to the land in summer and from the land to the sea in winter .
Local Winds .
These winds blow due to local variation in the temperature and pressure , and influence of very small ärea . Chinook Chinook means the snow - eater . This is the hot and dry wind blowing along the eastern slope of the Rockies and covers an area from the southern part of Colorado in the south to British Columbia in Canada in the north . Due to its effect , the snow melts and green grass sprout even in the winter . This wind is helpful for the animal rearing as it makes the grasslands snow free . Foehn This is similar to Chinook and blows along the northern slope of Alps . It affects the snow , makes the weather pleasant and helps in early ripening of the grapes . Sirocco : This is a warm and dry and dusty wind which blows in northerly direction from the Sahara Desert and after
Jet Stream
These are the winds blowing with great velocity near the Tropopause . The Jet Streams are active in 150 km wide and 2-3 km thick transition belt ....
Join on Telegram @apna channels

1. High Clouds ( Height : 42,500 ft . to 16,500 ft or 13 to 5 km , according to Encyclopaedia Britannica ) Cirrus Clouds : The high altitude detached clouds having fibrous ( Chain like ) or silky appearance are called cirrus clouds . They are composed of tiny crystals . Therefore , they do not cause rain fall . These clouds are indicator of cyclones ... Cirrocumulus : These are white coloured clouds having " patches of small white flakes or small globules which are arranged in distinct groups or wave like form . They generally appear as ripples similar to sand particles in the desert . ☐ Cirrostratus Clouds : These clouds are generally white in colour and spread in the sky like milky thin sheets . In fact , cirrostratus is a thin veil of cirrus clouds . These are transparent clouds and create halo around the sun and the moon . These clouds are seen just after the cirrus cloud at the onset of cyclone . In this way , they also indicate the arrival of a cyclone in the near future ..
2. Middle Clouds ( Height : 23,000 ft . to 6,500 ft . or 7 km T
Rainfall occurs only when cloud droplets become : sor | large due to coalescence that the air becomes unable to hold them . Based on the mode of origin , rainfall is , classified into these types- Convectional Rainfall : When the land surface is heated ,, | the air in its contact rises up and in this way convectional . currents are produced . When this warm and moist air . preaches up to a certain height , it becomes saturated and . forms dark Cumulo - Nimbus clouds , which cause heavy . rainfall . This type of rainfall is termed as convectional _rainfall and it occurs in the equatorial belt , especially . in the zone of Doldrums .
2. Orographic or Relief Rainfall : This type of rainfall i occurs more frequently where hills or mountains are situated near and parallel to the coast . When warm and moist air is obstructed by any hill or plateau , it starts , ascending along the slope of the hill or plateau and gets cooled . As a result it starts to get saturated and ther process of condensation starts . The rainfall caused by this process is called orographic rainfall . Cyclonic or Frontal Rainfall : Cyclonic rainfall is caused | due to ascending of moist air and adiabatic cooling caused by convergence of two extensive air masses entirely different physical properties ( warm and cold air mass ) . In the temperate region , warm air is lifted upward along the front where the westerlies and pola winds meet , whereas cold air being heavier settles
1 .
• 102 km . ) .
Altostratus Clouds : These are thin sheets of grey or blue clouds having fibrous or uniform appearance . When they . " become thick sheets , the Sun and Moon are obscured and they appear as bright spots behind the clouds . They yield widespread and continuous precipitation . Altocumulus Clouds : These clouds are characterized by white and grey wavy layers or globular forms . They
3 .
ران
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Coral Islands : The islands formed by the accumu- lation of coral polyps on the sub - marine platforms of the tropical oceans are called Coral islands . E.g. ..Lakshadweep , Maldives etc. Internal Structure of The Earth The Earth's Crust : The outermost solid cover of the earth is known as the earth's crust . > The thickness of the crust is about 30 km ..
shell
There are no layers in Igneous rocks .. Fossils are not found in Igneous rocks . The formation of Igneous rocks takes place beneath and above the surface of the earth .. Rocks formed by the cooling of molten matter beneath the earth's surface are called intrusive igneous rocks . ' Granite ” and “ Gabbro ' are the main examples of these .rocks . The intrusive rocks are thus crystalline rocks . Sometimes , the molten matter oozes out through cracks in the earth's crust and spreads on the surface , forming extrusive igneous rocks . Gabbro , Obsidian , Basalt etc. are examples of extrusive igneous rocks . A very large area of the Deccan Plateau consists of basalt rocks . These rocks contain silica from 40 to 80 % , others are . felspar , magnesium and iron etc. Other examples of Igneous rocks are - Granite , Pumic stone , Basalt and Gabbro . "
It is thicker in the region of the continents and thinner in the region of the ocean floors . > The density of the rocks in the earth's crust ranges from 2.7 to 3 g / c.c ( grams per cubic centimeter ) . > The upper part of the crust consists of silica and aluminium in greater proportions . That is why , it is called ' SIAL ' . Mantle This layer lies below the crust . The upper layer of Mantle is called ' Asthenosphere ' . Asthenosphere is a ductile mechanically weak layer just beneath the Earth's Lithosphere ( Which indudes the crust and very top of Mantle ) . The lower part of the crust is called ' SIMA ' because the proportion of silica and magnesium is higher in this part . > Its thickness is about 2900 km and the density of substances in the mantle ranges from 3.0 to 4.7.3 ** Core : The earth's core lies below the mantle . Its thickness may be about 3,471 km .
AA AA
Its radius is 6,371 km . , according to IUGG . It is divided into two parts - the outer core and the inner core . The outer core is probably in a liquid state and the inner core in a solid state .
Igneous Rocks
Metamorphic Rocks
Granite
Gneiss
The core mainly consists of Nickel and Ferrous i.e , Iron . Hence , it is called ' NIFE ' .
Gabbro
Serpentine
Syenite
Syenite Gneiss
After the mantle , the earth's density goes on increasing rapidly towards its centre and finally is more than 13 . The temperature of the central part of the earth may be about 5000 ° C .
Basalt
Bitüminus Coal
Graphite
Batholith : Large body of igneous rock formed beneath the Earth's surface by the intrusion and solidification of Join on Telegram @apna channels

1. Ojos del Salado
Argentina - Chile
In Maharashtra , the fertile black regur soil has been formed from basalt rocks . It is also called black cotton soil . The opening of exploded volcano is of different types . Some important types are Crater : This is funnel or cup - shaped opening at the top of the volcanic cone . It gets filled up with rain water then it forms a crater lake , e.g.- Loner Lake in Buldhana district ( Maharashtra ) . Sometimes many small craters are formed in a single crater . This take place when the exposition was of less intensity than that of pre - existing crater , these . are known as Nested craters , e.g. the three small craters of Mountain ( Philippines ) .
Ecuador
Cotopaxi
Ecuador Mexico Hawaii Island Cameroon ( Central Africa ) Ross Island ( Antarctica ) Sisily ( Italy ) Martinique Island ( France ) : Iceland : Gulf of Neples , Compria ( Italy ) Stromboli Island , Sisily ( Italy )
Chimborazo
Popocaepetl

5. Mauna Loa 6.Mt Cameroon . 7.Mt. Erebus 8.Mt. Etna 9.Mt. Pelee 10. Hekla 11.Mt. Vesuvius 12 Stromboli 13. Krakatoa 14. Mt. Katmai 15.Mt. Rainier . 16. Mt. Shasta
Indonesia Alaska ( US ) : Washington ( US )
Caldera This is widened form of crater which is formed due to depression of the crater or expansion of volcanic mouth or vent due to successive eruptions .. Depending on their intensity and duration , volcanic eruptions can create calderas as much as 100 km ( 62 miles ) wide . Mt. Aso of Japan is an example of Caldera . The Toba Join on Telegram @apna_channels
California ( US )

17.Mt FujiorFull - San ( Fujiyama ) Japan ma
Luzon Island , Philippines
18 Taal
Philin
Mt. Pinatubo -

20. Mt. Mayon
21 Damavand
Location / Country
Plateau
Balochistan ( Pakistan ) ; Myanmar
22 Koh - i - Sultan
Turkey
Asia Minor

23. Mt. Popa or Popa Hill 24. Mt. Elbrus .
Iberian Peninsula ( Spain )
Meseta
Russia
U.S.A.
Alaska / Yukon
25 Kilimanjaro
Tanzania
U.S.A.

26. Mt. Kenya
Kenya
Great Basin
Greenland Island
Greenland
Various Landforms
Turkey South Mexico
Anatolia
Mainly there are three types of landforms - Mountains , Plateaus , Plains .
Chiyapas Columbian
U.S.A. USA
Mountains
Colorado Tibetan Plateau Plains
The height of mountains are over 600 m and have conical peaks . On the basis of origin there are four types of mountains : Block Mountains , Residual Mountains , Accumulated Mountains and Fold Mountains .
Tibet nu poat
Plains are a major Landform category in geography , characterized by their flat or gently rolling terrain with minimal elevation change . They are typically formed by - various geological processes and can be broadly classified into three main types— Structural Plains : Formed by the uplift and erosion of large areas of land . These plains are typically underlain by relatively flat - lying bedrock layers . Examples - The Great Plains of North America , The Deccan Plateau in India . Erosional Plains : Formed by the erosion of existing landforms by wind , water or glaciers . Over time , ' these agents wear down mountains and hills , depositing the eroded sediments in low - lying areas , creating flat plains . Examples The Amazonian Plain in South America , The North German Plain in Europe . **
Block Mountains
> The middle part of such mountains is lower and the parts on both the sides are higher . The middle lower portion is called as Rift valley . The longest rift valley is the valley of the Jordan river . Black Forest ( Germany ) , Vindhyachal and Satpura ( India ) , Salt Range ( Pakistan ) are some examples of block mountains .
Residual Mountains
Such mountains are formed as a result of weathering . Examples - Aravalli , Nilgiri , Parasnath , Hills of Rajmahal ( India ) , Siera ( Spain ) . Accumulated Mountains
@apna_kiran
➤ These are formed due to accumulation of sand , soil , rocks , lava etc on the Earth's Crust . , e.g. Sand Dunes ... Fold Mountains These are formed because of the folds in the rocks due to internal motions of the earth . These are wavelike mountains which have numerous peaks and lows , e.g. Himalayas , Ural , Alps , Rockies , Andes etc.
Depositional Plains : Formed by the accumulation of sediments deposited by wind , water , or glaciers . These plains are formed by the layering of sediments over time , creating flat and fertile landscapes . There are further sub - categories within depositional plains depending on the depositing agent- ☐ Alluvial Plains : Formed by the deposition of sediments by rivers . These are fertile plains and often support agriculture . Example - The Indo - Gangetic Plain in India . Lacustrine Plains : Formed by the deposition of sediments in lakes . ExampleThe Po Plain in Italy . Loess Plains Formed by the wind deposition of fine - grained sediments called loess . Example - The Pampas in Argentina . Glacial Plains : Formed by the deposition of sediments by glaciers . Example - The Polish Plain in Europe . Forests . ( a ) Tropical Evergreen Rain Forests : Such forests are found in the equatorial and the tropical regions with more than 200 cms annual rainfall . The leaves of trees in such forests are very wide . Ex - Red wood , palm etc. ( b ) : Tropical Semi Deciduous Forests : Such forests receive rainfall less than 150 cms . Saagwan , saal , bamboo etc
Plateaus .
Plateaus are extensive upland areas characterised by flat and rough top surface and steep walls which rise above the neighbouring ground surface at least for 300 m . Some Plateaus Having More Than Average Height
13,000-15,000 ft About 12,000 ft $ 200-5,000 ft
Tibetan Plateau Bolivian Plateau Columbian Plateau
[ Sourec : Britannica ] Generally the height of plateau ranges from 300 to 500 feet . Intermountainous Plateaus : Plateaus formed between mountain , Example - Tibetan Plateau . Mountainstep Plateaus : The flat region between a plain and the base of a mountain .. Continental Plateaus : These are formed when the Lacolith inside the Earth comes to the surface due to weathering . e.g. the Southern Plateau . Bank Plateaus : These are the plateaus on the banks of the oceans .
are found in such forests ..
( c ) Temperate mixed Forests : Such forests are a mixture of trees and shrubs . Corks , Oak etc are the major trees these forests . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

21.76
Forest Cover
As compared to the assessment of 2017 , there is an increase of 5,188 sq . km in the total forest and tree cover of the country . Out of this , the increase in the forest cover has been observed as 3,976 sq km and that in tree cover is 1,212 sq . km . > The top five States in terms of increase in forest cover

1.12.014.34

3.41
Tree Cover
8,27,356.95

25.17
Total Forest and Tree Cover

1.33
43,622,64
Scrub
24,16,489.29
Non - Forest

73.50

100.00
Total Geographical Area 32,57,168.88 [ Source : India State of Forest Report 2023 ]
are Karnataka ( 1,025 sq km ) , Andhra Pradesh ( 990 sqa kisan They can be divided into two types : km ) , Kerala ( 823 sq km ) , Jammu & Kashmir ( 371 sq km ) and Himachal Pradesh ( 334 sq km ) . Area - wise Madhya Pradesh has the largest forest cover in the country followed by Arunachal Pradesh , Chhattisgarh , Odisha and Maharashtra . In terms of forest cover as percentage of total geographical area , the top five States are Mizoram ( 85.41 % ) , Arunachal Pradesh ( 79.63 % ) , Meghalaya ( 76.33 % ) , Manipur ( 75.46 % ) and Nagaland ( 75.31 % ) . The Mangrove ecosystems are unique & rich in biodiversity and they provide numerous ecological services . Mangrove cover has been separately reported in the ISFR 2019 and the total mangrove cover in the country is 4,975 sq km . Top three states showing mangrove cover increase are Gujarat ( 37 sq km ) followed by Maharashtra ( 16 sq km ) and Odisha ( 8 sq km ) . The total growing stock of wood in India is estimated 5,915.76 million cum of which 4,273.47 million cum is inside the forests and 1,642.29 million cum out - side .. The extent of bamboo bearing area of the country has been estimated 16.00 million hectare . Under the current assessment the total carbon stock in country's forest is estimated 7,124.6 million tonnes . The annual increase in the carbon stock is 21.3 million tonnes , which is 78.2 million tonnes CO₂ eq . Wetlands within forest areas form important ecosystems and add richness to the biodiversity in forest areas , both of faunal and floral species . There are 62,466
Pastures ( or Grasslands )
( i ) Tropical Pastures and ( ii ) Temperate Pastures Tropical Pastures : They have different names in different countries . Savanna in Africa , Campos in Brazil , Lanos in Venezuela and Columbia . Temperate Pastures : They are known by the following names - Praries in USA and Canada , Pampas in Argentina , Veld in South Africa , Rangelands or Downs in Australia and New Zealand , Steppes in Eurasia ( Ukraine , Russia ) . Land forms Created by the River System V - shaped Valley ➤ A river flows with a greater velocity in the mountai- nous region and big , pointed fragments of rock also flow with a great speed along with the water . > The river bed is scoured and down cutting starts ; ultimately giving rise to a deep valley with steep sides . This valley is called a V - shaped valley . ✓ These valleys are found in mountainous regions . A deep and narrow valley with steep sides is called a gorge . The e gorge of the river Ulhas in Thane district in Maharashtra and the gorge of the river Narmada at Bhedaghat near Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh are well
known .
There are many gorges in the Himalayas .. Waterfall If there are both hard ( resistant ) and soft ( less resistant ) rocks in the course of the river , the less resistant rock is eroded faster . Join on Telegram @apna channels

9. Sericulture Silk Farming 10. Vermiculture Cultivation of Earthworms 11. Viticulture Cultivation of Grapes Origin of Some Crops Origin India and Indonesia
Origin
Cop .
They cover the plateaus of Maharashtra , Saurashtra , Crop Malwa and southern Madhya Pradesh and extend eastward in the south along the Godavari and Krishna Valleys . Crops Grown : Cotton , Jowar , Wheat , Sugarcane , Linseed , Gram , Fruit & Vegetable .
Barley
China
Paddy
Arahar / Tur Africa
Mid America
Maize
Soya Bean
Mid Asia
Wheat
Mung .
Tobacco
South America
South America ( Brazil ) Ragi ( Jowar ) India
Rubber
Red Soils
Tea
Black Gram ( Urad ) India
> Formed by weathering of crystalline and metamorphic mixture of clay and sand .
Coffee
China
Lentil ( Masoor )
Potato
America
Guava Tomato
These soils are developed on old crystalline Igneous rocks under moderate to heavy rainfall conditions . These are red in colour because of their high Iron - oxide ( FeO ) content . These are deficient in phosphoric acid , organic matter and nitrogenous material . Red soils cover the eastern part of the peninsular region comprising Chhotanagpur plateau , Odisha ( Orissa ) , eastern Chhattisgarh , Telangana , the Nilgiris and Tamil Nadu plateau . These extend northwards in the west along the Konkan coast of Maharashtra . > Crops Grown : Wheat , Rice , Millets , Pulses . Laterite Soils : The Lateritesoils are formed duetoleaching / weathering . of lateritic rocks in high temperatures and heavy rainfall with alternate dry and wet period . They are found along the edge of plateau in the east covering small parts of Tamil Nadu , Odisha and a small part of Chhotanagpur in the north and Meghalaya in the north - east . Laterite soils are red in colour with a high content of iron - oxides ; poor in Nitrogen and Lime . · Crops Grown : Though unsuitable for agriculture due to high content of acidity and inability to retain moisture tea , coffee , rubber , cinchona , cashew , coconut , arecanut are grown on laterite soil .
Sugarcane India
Mexico
Fame Ad
Bajra | Africa Agriculture in India
According to BHARAT 2025 , about 54.6 % of the total population of the country is engaged in agriculture and allied activities ( Census 2011 ) . It provides food to the second biggest population and the biggest population of cattle in the world . Our agro - based industries are fully dependent on raw material provided by agriculture . kira Agriculture with its allied activities contribute 18.4 % to the country's GVA ( Gross Value Added during 2022-23 at current prices ) . Types of Agriculture in India : Subsistence Farming . In this type of agriculture , farmers work hard to grow enough food to survive only . In this type of farming the produce is consumed mainly by farmer and his family . > . There remains no surplus to sell in the market .
Soilless Agriculture ( Hydroponics ) Soilless agriculture refers to Hydroponics , which is a subset of hydroculture and is a method of growing plants using mineral nutrient solutions , in water , without soil . Terrestrial plants may be grown with their roots in the mineral solution only .
Arid & Desert Soil
Region NW India . Covers entire area of the west Aravalis in Rajasthan and parts of Haryana , Punjab & Gujarat .
4. Characteristics : Rich in Phosphates and Calcium but deficient in Nitrogen and humus . > Corps Grown : Fertile if irrigated e.g. Ganganagar area of Rajasthan ( Wheat basket of Rajasthan ) .
Mixed Farming
> The combination of agriculture and pastoral farming is called mixed farming . In this type of farming , cultivation of crops and rearing . of animals are done together on the same farm . Jhum / Shifting Cultivation
Kinds of Farming
S. Terminology
Description
This is a primitive form of agriculture , in which a plot of A land is cultivated for a few years and then is deserted . This slash and burn method of farming is carried on in jungles of north - eastern part of India e.g. in Assam , Meghalaya , Mizoram etc. A plot of land is cleared for cultivation . As the yield decreases after two or three years , the plot is abandoned and a fresh clearing is made . Join on Telegram @apna channels
growing plants in an air or mist environment without the use of soil or an aggregate medium Bee keeping ( rearing Honeybees )
Aeroponics

2. Apiculture
3 Floriculture
Flower farming
Hydroponics growing plants without soil by instead using mineral nutrient solutions in a water solvent .

1. Rabi
This season starts after the rainy season . Sowing begins in September - October and harvesting takes place in February - March : Wheat , barley , pulses and some oil seeds are grown in the Rabi season .

2. Kharif
apre kiran The Kharif season begins with the onset of the monsoons
in June - July .
The crop grows in the rainy season and harvesting takes place after the retreat of monsoon in September- October . ✓ Rice , maize , millets , groundnuts , cotton and jute are grown in the Kharif season .
Ranching is also a method used to raise less common livestock such as elk , American bison or even ostrich , emu and alpacas .
Contract Farming
> Contractfarmingisdefined as agricultural production carried out by agreement between farmers and buyers . It includes production of banana , mango , potato , garlic , onion etc. For example , contract farming of tomato is being done in Punjab , Haryaria and Rajasthan , sun - flowers in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka , and fruits and vegetables in Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra . Besides local food processing firms , Pepsi , Cola , Hindustan Ltd. etc. also participated in it . Presently , a new series of organized and modern retailers have stepped in the market . Subhiksha , Reliance Fresh , Big Apple , etc. are some of them . Contract farming helps farmers in being more decisive and being capable of selling and purchasing more efficiently .

3. Zayad
This is the summer season for growing crops which remain till April , May and June . Products are mainly vegetables and fruits . Green Revolution . The increase in agriculture productivity of cereals that has taken place since the 1960s mainly as a result of introduction of high yielding varieties of wheat and rice and use of fertilizers , machines and irrigation etc. , is known as green
revolution .
Green revolution has made us self - sufficient in food production . This has not only saved our much precious foreign exchange but has also made us self - reliant . But green revolution has proved more beneficial to rich farmers only , because it involves a lot of investment Minerals in India · Geological Survey of India ( HQ : Kolkata ) , Indian Bureau of Mines ( HQ : Nagpur ) , Oil and Natural Gas Commission - ONGC ( HQ Dehradun ) , Minera Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Extensive Farming
This is a system of farming in which the cultivator uses a limited amount of labour and capital on relatively Jarge area .
This type of agriculture is practised in countries where population size is small and land is enough .

55.9 % of total irrigation

31.4 % of total irrigation
( b ) Canals

6.1 % of total irrigation
( c ) Tanks

6.6 % of total irrigation ( Dongs , Kuhls , Springs etc. ) .
( d ) Other Sources
courses .
The Shetruniji is one such river which rises near Dalkahwa in Amreli district . The Bhadra originates near Aniali village in Rajkot district . The Dhadhar rises near Ghantar village in Panchmahal district . Sabarmati and Mahi are the two famous rivers of Gujarat . * The Vaitarna rises from the Trimbak hills in Nasik district at an elevation of 670 m . The Kalinadi rises from Belgaum district and falls in the Karwar Bay . The source of Bedti river lies in Hubli Dharwar and traverses a course of 161 km . The Sharavati is another important . river in Karnataka flowing towards the west . The Sharavati originates in Shimoga district of Karnataka and drains a catchment area of 2,209 sq . km . Goa has two important rivers one is Mandovi and the other is Juari .
Power Resources of India .
✓ .
India uses a large amount of fossil fuels as a source of energy along with a number of renewable sources of energy , viz . , hydroelectric power , thermal power , petroleum , nuclear or atomic power , solar energy , wind energy , tidal energy , bio - gas etc. Multipurpose Projects of India Multipurpose river valley projects , once referred by Jawahar Lal Nehru as " Temples of Modern India ' , present an integrating system of controlling floods , generation of hydroelectricity , irrigation , development of fishery and tourists spots , boating , navigation and draining away extra water . These projects aim at all round development of river . valleys . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Soll
Nangal
Bhakhra , 2 Ganguwal , 3 .
Soil
4. Kotla
Hydroelectricity generation ,
Irrigation ,
On river Sutlej 518 m long , 226 m high conservation
Damodar Valley Project

1. Irrigation , 2 Generation of Hydro and Thermal power ,
1. Maithon , 2- Tilaia ,
3. Panchet Hill , On river Damodar , located in West
3. Navigation ,
4. Flood control ( Damodar has turned from " Bokaro , 5. Durgapur , 6. Chandrapuri Bengal and Jharkhand a Valley of Sorrow " Valley of Plenty " ) .
Hirakud Project
1 .
Production of Hydel power , Hirakud ,
2. Chiplima On Mahanadi river near Sambhalpur ,
3. Navigation for over 480 km .
1 .
Irrigation ,
Odisha : 4800 m long .. Tungabhadra Project At Malappuram on the river Tungabhadra , it is 2441 m long and 49.3 : m high ; in Telangana and Kamataka . Rihand Project
At Malappuram ,
2. At Hampi ,
3. On left side of Malappuram
11 .

1. Irrigation ,
2. Generation of Hydro electricity
Hydroelectricity production .
Pimpri
On river Rihand
The Kaleshwaram Lift Irrigation Project ( KLIP ) is the largest multi stage Lift irrigation protect in the world . This was inaugurated on 21st June , 2019 at Bhoopalpally , Kale - shwaram , Telangana .
Bharatmala , Pariyojana .
The Government of India approved the Bharatmala Pariyojana in 2017. covering the length of 34,800 km which includes residual 10,000 km of NHDP . Total length of NHS approved and awarded under the scheme is 26,671 km in September , 2023. Total completed length of NHS is 14,376 km . As part of Bharatmala Parlyojana , 27 Greenfield Expressways and access controlled corridors of length around 10,000 kms are being developed to improve connectivity and economic prosperity . Some of the iconic projects of India's highway development prowess have been developed under this Pariyojana . These include to Bastern Peripheral Expressway , the Delhi - Meerut Expressway - India's first 14 - lane highway , the Chenani - Nashri tunnel ( J & K ) , which is the longest bi - directional road tunnel in Asia , the 313 km long Ambala - Kotputli corridor and Bengaluru Mysuru Expressway . Source : INDIA 2024 As of October 2024 , 26,425 km of NHs have been awarded under the scheme , with 18,714 km . completed . ⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀ Source : BHARAT 2025 > According to the last update of MORTH ( Ministry of Road Transport and Highways— ➤ As on 31.12.2022 Maharashtra has the largest share- 18,459.25 kms , of total length of National Highways , followed by Uttar Pradesh 12,270.23 kms . , Rajasthan . 10,706.34 kms . , Madhya Pradesh 9,104.64 kms . , Andhra , Pradesh 8,683.15 kms . , Karnataka 8,037.18 kms . , Gujarat‣ 7,885.00 kms . , Bihar 5,969.40 kms . , Odisha 5,897.08 kms . , and Telangana 4,925.76 kms . These 10 states accounted : for about 63.42 % of the total road length of NHS . As on 31.12.2022 the total length of National Highways , was 1,44,955 kms . There has been an increase in the construction of National Highways ( NHS ) / roads over , .time , with 10,457 km of roads constructed in FY22 as compared to 6,061 km in FY16 .
Transport in India
The present transport system of the country comprises several modes of transport including rail , road , coastal shipping , air transport etc ..
Transport
According to MoRTH Annual Report 2024-25 the total road length of the country is 63,45 , 453 kms . Atpresent Indian road network of over 63.45 lakh kms is the second largest in the world after the US and consist of-
na_kiran
146,195 kms Major District Roads 6,12,778 kms ,
National
Highways / Expressways
Rural Roads
45,22,228 kms 5,41,544 kms 3,53,163 kms 63,45,453 kms Source : MoRTH Annual Report 2024-25 ] :
Urban Roads
Project Roads
State Highways 1,79,535 kms Total length
National Highways ..
National Highways are constructed and maintained by the central govemment . The length of National Highways is 1,46,195 km . According to NHAI the National Highways constitute about 2 % of the country's road network , but carry roughly 40 % of the total road traffic . Source : BHARAT 2025 ] The development and maintenance of the National Highways system is carried out through three agencies - 1 . National Highways Authority of India ( NHAI ) ,
2. State Public Works Departments ( PWDs ) and
3. Border Roads Organisation ( BRO ) . In order to give boost to the economic development of the country , the government has embarked upon a massive National Highways Development Project ( NHDP ) in the country . The NHDP is the largest highway project everundertaken in the country . The NHDP is being implemented mainly by National Highways Authority of India ( NHAI ) .
> In FY23 ( until October 2022 ) , 4,060 km of NHs / roads were constructed , which was around 91 % of the achievement in the corresponding period of the previous financial year . Total budgetary support for investment in the sector has been increasing rapidly in 1 _ the last four years and stood at around € 1.4 lakh cror during FY23 ( as of 31 October 2022 ) . Some Important National Highways ( Ason 31 Mare New Old Route ( State and Lengli NH - 1 NH - 1A & Uri , Baramula , Srinagar ( J. &
✓ 1D
( Ladakh ) 422 km
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

20. Periyar National Park "
Idukki , Kerala
Elephant , Tiger , Panther , Wild boar , Gaur , Sambhar
21 Ranganathitu Bird Sanctuary Karnataka
Birds
Madhav Natioanl Park
Tiger , Birds
Shivpuri , MP

23. Sundarbans Natioanl Park Vedanthangal Bird Sanctury Wild Ass Sanctuary 26. Mahatma Gandhi National Marine Park Ramsar Wetland Sites
West Bengal Tamil Nadu
Tiger , Wild boar , Crocodile , Deer :
Birds
Little Rann of Kutch , Gujarat
Wild Ass , Wolf , Nilgai , Chinkara
Wandoor ( Port Blair ) Andan & Turtle , Crocodile , Coral reef , Sea Pans , Shark , Moray eels , Manta ray Nicobar Islands s
( Port - Blair )
The Ramsar Convention is an international treaty for the conservation and sustainable utilization of wetlands , recognizing the fundamental ecological functions of wetlands and their economic , cultural , scientific and recreational value .
Ramsar Wetland Sites : India ( As on February 2025 )
S. No. Name of Site
State Location
Date of Declaration 19.08.2002
Area ( in sq km )
Kolleru Lake
Andhra Pradesh :
Deepor Beel Kabartal Wetland .
Assam

19.08.2002
Bihar

21.07.2020
Nagi Bird Sanctuary
Bihar

04.06.2021
Nakti Bird Sanctuary :

04.06.2024 .
Bihar
Nanda Lake

06.08.2022
Goa
Khijadia Wildlife Sanctuary .

13.04.2021
Gujarat :
Nalsarovar Bird Sanctuary .

24.09.2012 .
Gujarat
" .
Thol Lake Wildlife Sanctuary

05.04.2021-
Gujarat
Wadhivana Wetland a
10 .

05.01.2021
Gujarat
Bhindawas Wildlife Sanctuary

25.05.2021
Haryana

1.43

25.05.2021
Sultanpur National Park
Haryana
£ 0.49
Himachal Pradesh
Chandertal Wetland

08.11.2005

156.62

19.08.2002
14 :
Himachal Pradesh
Pong Dam Lake

08.11.2005

0.20
$ 15 ,
Himachal Pradesh
Renuka Wetland .

23.03.1990 ,
$ 189.00
$ 16
Wular Lake
Jammu and Kashmir

13.75

08.11.2005
Hokera Wetland
Jammu and Kashmir

08.11.2005

3.50
Surinsar - Mansar Lakes
Jammu and Kashmir .

13.08.2022

18.02
$ 19 .
Hygam Welland Conservation Reserve Jammu and Kashmir Shallbugh Wetland Conservation Reserve Jammu and Kashmir

16.75

13.08.2022
[ 02.02.2025

9.36
Jharkhand
Udhwa Lake Bird Sanctuary
Join on Telegram @apna channels

48.01

31.01.2024
Karnataka .
22 .
Aghanashini Estuary

31.01.2024

0.98
Kamataka
nkasamudra Bird
23 .
Conservation Reserve .

31.01.2024

0.54
Magadi Kere Conservation
Karnataka
Reserve

5.18

15.02.2022
Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary
Karnataka
61:40

19.08.2002
Asthamudi Wetland
Kerala
.3.73 °

19.08.2002
Sasthamkotta Lake
Kerala

19.08.2002

1512.50
Vembanad Kol Wetland Tsomoriri Lake Tso Kar Wetland Complex . Bhoj Wetlands Sakhya Sagar Sirpur Wetland , Yashwant Sagar
Kerala

120.00

19.08.2002
Ladakh .

95.77

17.11.2020
Ladakh
: 30 :

32.01
.19.08.2002
Madhya Pradesh .

2.48
.01.07.2022
Madhya Pradesh

1.61 .

01.07.2022
Madhya Pradesh

13.08.2022

8.23
Madhya Pradesh

22.08.2024

200.50
Tawa Reservoir
Madhva Pradesh

22.07.2020

4.27
Maharashtra .
Lonar Lake
$ 36 .

21.06.2019

14.37
Nandur Madhameshwar
Maharashtra

65.21
Thane Creek

13.08.2022
Maharashtra

266.00

23.03.1990 .
Loktak Lake
Manipur

18.50

31.08.2021
Pala Wetland .
Mizoram
40 .

1165.00
Odisha

01.10.1981
Chilka Lake
41 .

650.00 .

19.08.2002
Bhitarkanika Mangroves
Odisha .
Satkosia Gorge

981.97

10.12.2021
Odisha

13.08.2022
$ 2.31
Odisha
Ansupa Lake

654.00

13.08.2022
Hirakud Reservoir
Odisha

13.00

13.08.2022
: Odisha
Tampara Lake

64.29 .
$ 26.09.2019 .
Punjab
Beas Conservation Reserve

41.00

23.03.1990
Punjab
Harike Lake
apna kiran

22.01.2002
1:83
Punjab
Kanjli Lake
49 .

26.09.2019

3.44 .
Punjab
Keshopur - Miani Community Reserve .
50 .
.1.16

26.09.2019
Punjab
Nangal Wildlife Sanctuary
51 :

13.65

22.01.2002 .
Punjab
Ropar Lake

01.10.1981-

28.73 .
Keoladeo Ghana NP
Rajasthan

240.00

23.03.1990
Rajasthan
Sambhar Lake
∙ 1.72

02.02.2025
Sikkim .
Khachoedpalri Wetland
55 :

526.72

04.08.2022 .
Tamil Nadu
Gulf of Mannar Marine Biosphere
Reserve

0.58-

04.08.2022
Tamil Nadu
Karikili Bird Sanctuary

0.72

11.08.2021
Tamil Nadu .
Koonthankulam Bird Sanctuary

31.01.2024

4.53
Karaivetti Bird Sanctuary :
Tamil Nadu
$ 59 :
$ 12.48

04.08.2022
Tamil Nadu
Pallikaranai Marsh Reserve Forest

14.79 .

04.08.2022
Tamil Nadu
Pichavaram Mangrove
61 .

31.01.2024
$ 1.16
Tamil Nadu
Longwood Shola Reserve Forest

385.00

19.08.2002
Tamil Nadu
Point Calimere Wildlife and Bird
Sanctuary

0.44 .

04.08.2022
Udhayamarthandapuram Bird Sanctuary Tamil Nadu
Tamil Nadu

0.40

04.08.2022
Vedanthangal Bird Sanctuary "

0.77
Vellode Bird Sanctuary
Tamil Nadu

04.08.2022
66 .
Vembannur Wetland Complex

0.20
Tamil Nadu

04.08.2022 .

2.60
Tamil Nadu .
Chitrangudi Bird Sanctuary .

13.08.2022
68 .

0.97 %
Tamil Nadu
Kanjirankulam Bird Sanctuary

13.08.2022
Suchindram Theroor Wetland Complex
Tamil Nadu

0.94

13.08.2022
Vaduvur Bird Sanctuary :
Tamil Nadu
$ 1.13

13.08.2022
Kazhuveli Sanctuary

22.08.2024
Tamil Nadu
5152
Tamil Nadu
Nanjarayan Sanctuary

26.08.2024
1:26
Sakkarakottai Sanctuary
Tamil Nadu

2.30

02.02.2025
Join on Telegram @apna channels

02.02.2025

0.29
Rudrasagar Lake
Tripura

08.11.2005
Bakhira Wildlife Sanctuary
Uttar Pradesh :

29.06.2021
Haiderpur Wetland
Uttar Pradesh

08.12.2021
Nawabganj Bird Sanctuary
Uttar Pradesh

19.09.2019
Parvati Agra Bird Sanctuary
Uttar Pradesh

02.12.2019
180 .
Saman Bird Sanctuary
Uttar Pradesh

02.12.2019
Uttar Pradesh
Samaspur Bird Sanctuary .

03.10.2019
82 .
Sandi Bird Sanctuary ..
Uttar Pradesh

26.09.2019 .
183 ]
Sarsai Nawar Jheel .
Uttar Pradesh

19.09.2019
Uttar Pradesh
Sur Sarovar

4.31

21.08.2020
185
186

265.90
Uttar Pradesh
Upper Ganga River

08.11.2006

4.44
Uttarakhand

21.07.2020
Asan Conservation Reserve .
West Bengal :

125.00

19.08.2002
$ 8 .
East Kolkata Wetlands
West Bengal

4230.00

30.01.2019
89 .
Sunderbans Wetland
¡ Source : ENVIS Centre on Wildlife & Protected Areas , Ministry of Environment & Forests , Government of India ] . Important Irrigation and Power Projects ( India )
Location
State .
Purpose
*** Name of the Project
Between Nalgonda ,
Irrigation , Hydro - electricity
Nagarjuna Sagar Multipurpose Project River Krishna
Telangana and Guntur ,
Andhra Pradesh
Pochampad Project Lower Sileru Project Kakadpada Project Kothagudam Project Kosi Project
Irrigation Hydro - electricity Irrigation , Atomic power Thermal Power Flood Control , Irrigation Irrigation , Hydro - electricity Thermal Power ( Oil and Gas based ) Hydro - electricity
River Godawari
Telangana ..
River Sileru ( Godawari Basin ) Andhra Pradesh
River Tapi ,
Gujarat
Singareni Coalfields
Telangana
Bihar
River Kosi
Gandak Project
Uttar Pradesh , Bihar
River Gandak
Dhuvaran Power Station ⠀
Kheda District ..
Gujarat
Sabarigiri ( Pamba - Kakki ) Project River Pamba - Kakki @apna kiērala
Kerala
River Periyar Cherutheni Dam River Tawa ( Narmada Bassin ) River Chambal · Near Korba Coalfields Patharkada Station , Betul River Koyna
Hydro - electricity . Irrigation
Tawa Project
Madhya Pradesh . Rajasthan , Madhya Pradesh Chhattisgarh
Irrigation , Hydro - electricity Thermal Power .
Chambal Project :
Korba Project
Thermal Power
Satpura Power
Madhya Pradesh ( MP )
Hydro - electric
Koyna Project
Maharashtra
Koradi , Near Nagpur
Koradi Power Station
Thermal Power
Maharashtral
Tungabhadra Multipurpose Project River Tungabhadra
Karnataka and Andhra Pra . Irrigation , Hydro - electricit
Upper Krishna Project
Irrigation .
River Krishna
Karnataka )
Sharavati Project
River Sharavati
Karnataka ( near Jog Falls ) Hydro - electricity
Hirakud Multipurpose Project
River Mahanadi .
Odisha
Irrigation , Hydro - electricity , Irrigation
Mahanadi Delta Project Talcher Power Station Bhakra - Nangal Multipurpose Project Indira Gandhi Nahar Project ( IGNP ) River Ravi - Beas and Sutlej
River Mahanadi .
Odisha Odish
Thermal Power
Near Talcher
Irrigation , Hydro - electricity
Punjab , Haryana , Rajasthan
River Sutlej , Bilaspur ( HP )
Rajasthan Headworks in Irrigation
( Rajasthan Canal Project ) ¨¨¨ **
Punjab
Kundah Project
Hydro - electricity Thermal power
River Kundah N
Tamil Nadu :
Neyveli Power Station Ramganga Multipurpose Project
Tamil Nadu
Neyveli
Irrigation , Hydro - electricity
Chuisot stream ( near Kalagarh ) , Uttarakhand
Pauri
Matatila Multipurpose Project Rihand Scheme .. Obra Power Station
Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pra . Irrigation , Hydro - electricity
River Betwa
River Rihand Sonbhadra ( UP ) UP , MP , Bihar , Chhattisgarh , Irrigation Hydro - electricity
Uttar Pradesh
Thermal Power
Obra
Jharkhand shared with West Flood , Control Hydro - electricity
Damodar Valley Project
River Damodar
Bengal
Irrigation
Gujarat
Ukai Project
River Tapi
Irrigation
MP .
Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project
River Mahi
Irrigation ; Hydro - electricity Irrigation
River Ghataprabha
Karnataka Telangana Gujarat and MP UP and
Ghataprabha Project ,
Rajiv Bhima Lift Irrigation Project River Krishna
Irrigation and Hydro - electricity Irrigation and Hydro - electricity
River Narmada
Sardar Sarowar Project Ban Sagar Project
River Sone
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2052.82
Arunachal Pradesh
West Bengal , Sikkim , Arunachal Pradesh , Assam

2. Namdapha TR
Bhutan
699
$ 783.00
Arunachal Pradesh

3. Kamlang TR
7 Afghani stan
Jammu & Kashmir ( PoK )

1198.45
106
Arunachal Pradesh

4. Pakke TR
$ 3150.92
Assam

5. ManasTR
Colour Revolutions in India
344

6. Nameri TR
Assam
Related to
Revolution
492 : 46

7. Orang Tiger Reserve ?
Assam

1. Black Revolution
Petroleum Fish :

1173.58
Assam

8. Kaziranga TR
2 Blue Revolution

899.38
Bihar

9. Valmiki TR
3 Brown Revolution 4 Golden Revolution 5. Golden Fibre Revolution . 6 Green Revolution 7Grey Revolution 8 Pink Revolution 9 Red Revolution 10 Silver Revolution
Leather / Cocoa Horticulture / Honey Jute ** = * = * = *
Chhattisgarh

1842.51

10. Udanti - Sitanadi TR

914.017

11. Achanakmar TR
Chhattisgarh

2799.07
Chhattisgarh

12. Indravati TR
Food Grains

2829.387

13. Guru Ghasidas Tamor .
Chhattisgarth
Fertilizer Onion / Prawn Meat / Tomato Egg / Poultry
Pingla TR

1129.93

14. Palamau TR :
Jharkhand

1456.3

15. Bandipur TR
Karnataka

1064.29
$ 16 . Bhadra TR
Milk / Diary
Karnataka
11 White Revolution
Oil Seeds
12 Yellow Revolution

17.Dandeli - Anshi TR .

1097.511
Karnataka

1205.76
13 PM Modi's Tricolour Revolution Second Green Revolution

18. Nagarahole TR
Karnataka
Protein Rich Pulses

574.82

19. Biligiri Ranganatha Temple TR Karnataka
White Revolution
Cattle Welfare
925

20. Periyar TR
Kerala
Blue Revolution
For fishermen's welfare and

21. Parambikulam TR

643.662
Kerala
Clean water , Solar Energy

2051.791

22. Kanha TR
Madhya Pradesh
Saffron Revolution
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

0.26
8,461.13
( In km² ) 1179.63225
7,054.60

0.21

23. Pench TR
87,16291

5.69
Madhya Pradesh
( PAs )
24 Bandhavgarh TR

1598.1
Madhya Pradesh
[ Source : WII ENVIS ]

25. Panna TR
Madhya Pradesh

1578.55
Cities at the Bank of River

26. Satpura TR
Madhya Pradesh 2133.30797
River
City / Tovide
River
City Tow
27 Sanjay - Dubri TR

1674.502
Madhya Pradesh
Pearl River
Kabul
Guangzhou
Kabul
28 : Ratapani TR
Madhya Pradesh ::

1271.465
Canton

29. Madhav TRª
Madhya Pradesh :

1651.387
Confluence of Basra ( Iraq ) .
Shatt - Al-
Allahabad
30 Melghat TR

2768.52 )
Maharashtra .
Arab ( Tigris
Ganga , Jamuna ,
Euphrates )
31 : Tadoba - Andhari TR
Saraswati

1727.5911
Maharashtra
Cairo ( Egypt )
Nile :
Godawari
Nasik

32. Pench TR
74122
Maharashtra
Ankara ( Turkey ) Ankara
Hooghly
Kolkata

33. Sahyadri TR

1165.57
Maharashtra
Baghdad ( Iraq ) Tigris
Mahanadi
Cuttack

34. Nawegaon - Nagzira TR

653.674
Maharashtra
Berlin ( Germany ) . Spree
Ganga
Patna
35 : Bor TR

138.12
Maharashtra
Khartoum ( Sudan ) Nile
Kamaphuli
Chittagong

36. Dampa TR
988 .
Mizoram
Danube ,
Belgrade
Gomati
Lucknow

37. Similipal TR
2750
Sava
Odisha
Subamarekha Cologne ( Germany ) Rhine Lisbon ( Portugal ) : Tagus

38. Satkosia TR

963.87
Jamshedpur
Odisha
Ganga
39 Ranthambore TR
Haridwar

1411.291
Rajasthan
Glasgow ( Scotland ) Clyde
Jamuna
Delhi

40. Sariska TR
Rajasthan
Seine
Paris ( France )
Ganga
Kanpur

41. Mukandra Hills TR
Rajasthan
Hamburg ( Germany ) Elbe
Surat :
Tapti

42. Kalakad - Mundanthurai TR : Tamil Nadu
- >
Budapest ( Hungary ) Danube
Jhelum
Srinagar ( J & K )

43. Mudumalai TR
Tamil Nadu
Rome ( Italy ) .
Tiber
Sutlej
Ferozepur
44 Sathyamangalam TR
Tamil Nadu
( Punjab )
Warsaw ( Poland ) Vistula

45. Anamalai TR :
Sutlej
Ludhiana .
Tamil Nadu
( Punjab )

46. Srivilliputhur Megamalai
Tamil Nadu
Karachi ( Pak )
Malir , Lyari
Bristol ( UK )
Avon

47. Kawal TR

2019.12
.Telangana
and Indus
48 Amrabad TR
261139 na
Telangana
London ( UK ) Thames New Castle ( U.K. ) Tyne
Ravi
Lahore ( Pak )
49 : Dudhwa

2201.7748
Uttar Pradesh
Vijayawada
Krishna

50. Pilibhit
Uttar Pradesh

730.2498
New York ( U.S.A ) Hudson Chongqing ( China ) Yang - tze
Varanasi .
Ganga Irrawaddy
51 : Amangarh ( buffer of Corbett Uttar Pradesh
Yangon

80.6
and Jailing Mississippi
Tiger Reserve ) .
( Myanmar ) :
Akyab
Irrawaddy New Orleans .
Jim Corbett TR
Uttarakhand

1288.31
( Myanmar )
52 , Rajaji TR
Uttarakhand

1075.17
Shanghai ( China ) Yang - tze
Montreal ( Canada ) St. Lawrence Quebec ( Canada ) St. Lawrence Towns Associated with Important Industries

53. Sunderbans TR
West Bengal

2584.89
Nanking ( China ) Yang - tze ,

54. Buxa TR
West Bengal

757.9038

55. Ramgarh Vishdhari
Rajasthan

1052.12
( India )

56. Ranipur TR
Uttar Pradesh :

529.36
Town
57 : Veerangana Durgavati TR Madhya Pradesh

2339.12
Ahmedabad ( Gujarat )
Cotton Textiles , pharmaceuticals

58. Dholpur Karauli TR
Rajasthan

599.6406
Agra ( UP ) Asen ( Germany )
Leather , apparel , garments Manufacturing Industries , Itron and Steel Oil and natural gas Aircraft , Telephones , IT , Biotech Steel Plant , cement Manufacturing Industries
Total Area 84,487.83 sq . km , [ Source : NTCA ]
and Automotive
* As on 16 May , 2025
Baku ( Azerbaijan ) Bengaluru ( Karnataka ) Bhilai ( Chhattisgarh ) Birmingham ( UK )

1. Kamlang TR is the 50th Tiger Reserve in India .
2. Orang TR is the 49th Tiger Reserve in India .
3. Jim Corbett TR / National Park , earlier known as Hailey National Park established in 1936 , is the 1st National Park of India
4. Madhav ( MP ) is the 58th TR in India ( as on May 16 , 2025 )
and Automotive
Bangkok ( Thailand ) Belfast ( N. Ireland ) Bhagalpur ( Bihar ) Mumbai ( Maharashtra )
Agro based , Petroleum refining , Tourism Ship building Silk cotton textile , agro Film industries , cotton textile , automobile , petro - chemical Metallurgy , Military , production Cloths , shoes , tourism Jute , textile , leather works , Bengali film Iron and Steel , ship building
[ Source : ENVIS ]
Protected Areas of India ( As on February , 2025 ) No
Chelyabinsk ( Russia ) . Cadiz ( Portugal ) Kolkata ( W. Bengal ) Kobe ( Japan )
Coverage Country
Total ( km )
Legal Status of otected Areas
106 44,402.94
National Parks Wildlife Sanctuaries
574 1.27.241.24
Chittaranjan ( W. Bengal ) Locomotives .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3.323
Nepal :
1,751
Andhra Pradesh Pulicat Lake Andhra Pradesh , Tamil Nadu
Kolleru
Myanmar
$ 1.643
Bhutan
699 ,
Afghanistan Total
106
15,106.7
( Source MHA , Gol ]
Kerala
Vembanad Lake
Major Waterfalls of India
Height River
Waterfalls
Place
455 Varahi
Kunchikal Falls :
Karnataka
Kerala
Ashtamudi
Sharavathi Sharavathi
253
Karnataka
Jog / Garsoppa / Mahatma
Gandhi
Shivanasamudra
90 Kaveri
Karnataka
Gautamdhara / Jonha
Jharkhand
85 Raru
Maharashtra
Lonar Lake
Hundru
Subamrekha Jharkhand
Sankh Jharkhand
Sadni
Hussain Sagar Telangana
Ghataprabha Karnataka
Gokak
Jharkhand TamilNadu Bihar Rajasthan Rajasthan
Dassam :
Kanchi
40 .
Pykara = ***
Pykara
Kakolat
24 Kakolat
Cholamu Lake Sikkim
Chulia

18. Chambal
Punasa
Chambal
Madhya
Dhuandhar
30 Narmada
Pradesh
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

877.97 193.95 343 30
Malveth Poornais the youngest Femalein the world to reach Mt. Everest at the age of 13 on 25th May , 2014 . Raghav Juneja ( Moradabad , U.P. ) is the youngest Indi an male to scale Mt. Everest at the age of 15 on 21st May 2013. He was a member of the first school team in the world to scale Mt. Everest . Besides Raghav . there were 5 other students in the team . Arjun Vajpai ( NOIDA , U.P. ) scaled the Mt. Everest al the age of 16 years on 13th May , 2010 . Note : There is no age bar to scale Mt. Everest from Tibetan Join on Telegram @apfia_channels
Goa
Karnataka
Kerala

600.15
Tamil Nadu

1.068.69
Andhra Pradesh
105307
Odisha
$ 574.71
West Bengal

721.02
Daman & Diu
54:38
Pondicherry Lakshadwerp Islands
42,65 *

144.80

1. Hanging Garden of Babylon
China
Peru
Australia
Zinc
Temple of Diana at Ephesus ( Rome )
China
Australia
Russia
Gold

3. Statue of Jupiter at Olympia
Mexico
China
Peru
Silver
Pyramids of Egypt :
USA
India
China
Coal
Mausoleum of Mausolus ( Ruler of Halicarnasus )
Namibia
Canada
Kazakhastan
Uranium
6 Light house of Alexandria
Saudi Arabia
Russia
USA
Petrolium

7. Colossus at Rhodes ( 912 ft . high Statue of Helos , the Sun God ) Seven Wonders of the Medieval World 15 Great Wall of China
2. Porcelain Tower of Nanking ( China ) Colosseum of Rome ( Italy ) Stone henge of England Leaning Tower of Pisa ( Italy ) 6 : Catacombs of Alexandria 7.Mosque at St. Sophia ( Constantinople ) New Seven Wonders of the World As declared on July 7 , 2007 by New Seven Wonders Foundation of Switzerland , at a grand ceremony organised in ' Stadia da Lutz , Benefica stadium in Lisbon ( Portugal ) .
USA .
Russia
Iran
Natural gas
Production Year - 2024
World's Manufacturing Industries
Leading Countries
Industry
India , China , USA , Brazil
Cotton Textile Industry
China , India , Japan , USA China , Australia , New Zealand ) Turkey China , India , Uzbekistan , Brazil , Japan China , USA , Japan , India China , South Korea , Japan USA , China , Russia , Canada Chemical Industry
Iron & Steel Industry . Woolen Textile Industry
Silk Textile Industry Motor Vehicle Industry
Ship building Industry . Aircraft Building Industry @apna_kSulphuric Acid

1. The Taj Mahal ( Agra , India ) The Great Wall of China ( China ) " 3 The Pink Ruins of Petra ( Jordan )
China , USA , India , Russia China , USA , India , Russia China , Morocco , USA , Russia Canada , Russia , China , Belarus * Famous Sites ( World ) .
4The Statue of Christ the Redeemer in Rio de Janerio ( Brazil ) 5. Incan Ruins of Machu Pichu ( Peru ) 6. The ancient Mayan City of Chichen Itza ( Mexico ) . 7.The Colosseum of Rome ( Italy ) Other Wonders of the World The Sphinx , near Gizeh ( Ghiza ) in Egypt 12. The Catacombs at Rome
3. The Circus Maximus at Rome 4 Angkor Vat temple in Combodia :
Nitrogenous Fertilizer . Phosphate Fertilizer Potash Fertilizer
Site
Location
Jerusalem ( Israel )
Al - Aqusa Mosque
London ( UK ) Berlin ( Germany ) New York ( USA ) Munich ( Germany ) London ( UK ) Rome ( Italy ) London ( UK ) . Paris ( France )
Big Ben
Bradenberg Gate Broadway Brown House Buckingham Palace Colossium Downing Street Eiffel Tower :
、, '

5. The Alhambra at Granada in S. Spain 6. Shew Dragon Pagoda or the Golden Pagoda at Yangon in Myanmar 7. Mosque at St. Sophia ( Constantinople ) Important Crops and their Producers ( World )
Cropa :
First place Second place Third place .
London ( UK )
Fleet Street
Russia
Grand
Arizona ( USA )
Canyon
Wheat
China
India
Russia Banglasdesh
London ( UK )
Harley Street
Rice
China
India
London ( U.K. )
Hyde Park
Com ( Maize )
China
U.S.A.
Brazil
London ( UK ) Mecca ( Saudi Arabia ) Moscow ( Russia ) Pisa ( Rome )
India House
Cotton
India
China
USA :
Kaaba
China
India
Kenya
Kremlin
Sugar
India
Brazil
China
Rubbe
Leaning Tower
Indonesia India " Vietnam .:
Vietnam Brazil
Thailand
Paris ( France )
Louvre ( Museum )
Tobacco
China
Jakarta ( Indonesia ) Sydney ( Australia ) London ( UK ) Washington ( USA ) Nanjing ( China )
Merdeka Palace
Coffee
Columbia
Brazil
Opera House
Banana
China :
India
Indonesia
Oval
Jute
India
Bangladesh China
Pentagon
Orange
Brazil
China
India
Porcelain Tower
Produc
ear - 2023 %
Join on Telegram @apna channels

15. Bosporous Strait Black Sea & Marmara Sca Turkey 16. Dardenleez Strait Marmara Sea and Agean Turkey Sea
Lhasa ( Tibet ) Egypt
Potala Palace Pyramid Red Square Scotland Yard Shwedagon Pagoda
Moscow ( Russia ) London ( U.K. ) Yangon ( Myanmar )
Baffin Bay & Atlantic Ocean Greenland - Canada N.Atlantic & Arctic Oceán Greenland - Iceland English Channel & North England - France Sea

17. Davis Strait 18. Denmark Strait

10. Dover Strait
Egypt
Sphinx
New York ( US.A. ) .
Statue of Liberty
Gulf of Mexico and
USA - Cuba

20. Florida Strait
Rome ( Italy ) . Jerusalem ( Israel )
Vatican
Atlantic Ocean
Wailing Wall
Gulf of Persia & Gulf of Oman - Iran Oman

21. Hormuz Strait
New York ( USA . )
Wall Street
London ( UK )
Westminster Abbey " :
Gulf of Hudson &
Canada
22 Hudson Strait
London ( UK )
White Hall
Atlantic Ocean
Washington ( USA . )
White House

23. Gibraltar Strait Mediterranean Sea &
Spain - Morocco
. Atlantic Ocean . Pacific ocean and S. Atlantic Ocean .
Highest Mountain Peaks ( World )

24.Magellan Strait
Chile
Range
Heichelin metres )
Himalayas
8850
Mount Everest .

25. Makkassar Strait Java Sea and Celebes Sea Indonesia 26. Tsungaru Strait Japan Sea & Pacific Ocean Japan ( Hokkaido- Honshu Island ) Japan Sea & Okhotsk Sea Russia ( Between
8611
Karakoram
2 K - 2 ( Godwin Austen ) .
8586
Himalayas
Kanchenjunga
Lhotse
Himalayas

27.Tatar Strait
8463
Himalayas
Sakhalin Island and Asian mainland ) New Zealand
Makalu
Himalayas
8201
Qoyu

28. Foveaux Strait S. Pacific Ocean
Himalayas
37 Dhaulagiril
8167
( Tasman Sea & Java Sea ) ( between S. Island
Himalayas
Manaslu I
8163
Stewart Island ) ]
Nanga Parvat
8126
Himalayas

29. Formosa Strait 30 Luzon .
S. China Sea & E. China Sea China - Taiwan
8091 Himalayas ) [ Source : Encyclopaedia Britannica ] Three Deepest Oceans
10 A
Taiwan and Luzon
Philippine Sea to the
island of the . Philippines
South China Sea in the western Pacific Ocean
Greatest dept location
East China Sea , the Yellow South Korea and Sea and the Sea of Japan in Japan the northwest Pacific Ocean
Greatest depil in metres feel )
apna_kiran

31.Korea
Pacific Ocean ( W ) :

11.034 m
Challenger Deep , Mariana
Trench
( 36,201 ft )
East China Sea to Pacific Japan Ocean

32. Tokra
י :
Atlantic Ocean ( N )
8,380 m
Milwaukee Depth , Puerto
Rico Trench
( 27,493 ft )
separates the Labrador Canada Peninsula from the island of Newfoundland

33. Belle Isle
7,450 m
Sunda Deep of Java
Indian Ocean ( E )
the
( 24/442 ft ) Trench
[ Source : Encyclopaedia Britannica ]
South China Sea to the separates . Java Sea
the

34.Karimata
Indonesian islands of Sumatra and Bomeo Sea Korea and Japan
Major Straits of the World ( Connects )
Location
Connects
ame balacca Strait
Andaman Sea & South Indonesia - Malaysia China Sea Bay of Mannar & Bay of India - Sri Lanka Bengal Java Sea & Indian Ocean Indonesia Gulf of Mexico and Mexico - Cuba Cambean Sea .
Japan Sea , Yellow

35. Tsushima
and East China Sea

2. Palk Strait
Major Straits of the World ( Separates )
Sunda Strait
Strait
Separates
Ocean / Sea
Yucatan Strait
Bering Russia and the United States Arctic Ocean with the Beng
Sea
Mesma Strait
Mediterranean Sea
Italy - Sicily
Gibraltar Gibraltar and Peninsular Atlantic Ocean to to Spain in Europe from Mediterranean Sea " Morocco in Africa . Dover Great Britain ( England ) from North Sea - English Channe continental Europe ( France ) ( Atlantic Ocean ) Malacca Malay Peninsula and the Indian Ocean ( Bay of Beng _ Indonesianisland of Sumatra and the Pacific Ocean ( Jaya Se Florida Florida Keys and Cuba Gulf of Mexico and t Atlantic Ocean
Otranto Strait 7 Bab - el - Mandeb Strait
Adriatic Sea & Ionian Sea Italy - Albania Red Sea & Gulf of Aden Yemen - Djibouti ( Arabian Sea )
Cook Strait
S. Pacific Ocean
New Zealand ( N & S island ) Mozambique Madagascar
Tasman Sea ) :
Mozambique Channel
Indian Ocean
10 North Channel
Irish Sea & c Atlantic Ocean Ireland - England Arafura Sea & Gulf of Papua New Papua Guinea - Australia Tasman Sea & South Sea Australia
Taurus Strait
Palk
Bay of Bengal and Arabian
India and Sri lanka
· Important Discoveries ( World ) Roald Amundsen ( Norway ) First person to reach
Strait
Bering Sea & Chuksi Sea Alaska - Russia .
ring
South Pole ( December 14 , 1911 ) .
Strait Mediterranean Sea
Corsika - Sardinia
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3.110 feet ( 947 metres )
South Africa
Venezuela
2,000 - feet ( 600 metres ) ,
Zambia Zimbabwe 355 feet ( 108 metres )
New Zealand California
1,904 feet ( 580 m ) 1,612 feet ( 491 metres ) .
Kamarang Great Falls Guyana
145 metres 190 feet ( 57 metres ) 1,415 feet ( 410 m ) 1,400 feet ( 125 metres ) 830 feet ( 253 metres )
North America
Niagara Della Gavarnie
Canada
France
India
Jog
( Source : Encyclopaedia Britannica ]
' Cape of Good Hope ' ( 12 March , 1488 ) and hamed it " Cabodaspna_kiran
Major Lakes of the World
Tormentas " ( i.e. , Cape of Storms ) . Fridtjof Nansen ( Norway ) : Discovery of Greenland and Mountains of North Pole ( 1888 ) . Ferdinand Magellan ( Portugal ) : First person to travel around the world through sea discovered and named the Pacific Ocean ( 1520 ) . · Abel Tasman ( Dutch ) : First European Traveller to dis- cover New Zealand ( 1642 ) and Australia ( 1644 ) . Jacques Cartier ( France ) : First European to map the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and discovered Canada ( 1534-1542 ) . Hernan Cortes ( Spain ) : Discovered Mexico ( 1519 ) . Major Canals of the World __Name ___ | Location
S Name of Lake
Location
rea
( in Jam )
Caspian Sea
Russia , Kazakhstan , Turkmenistan , 3,71,000
Azerbaijan and Iran

2. Superior
3. Victoria
82,100
America and Canada .
69,481
Kenya , Uganda and Tanzania
68,000
Aral Sea
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan
USA and Canada .
59,600

5. Huron
6 Michigan 7 Tanganyika
57,800
USA
32,900
Tanganyika , Zambia and Za
S. Baikal
31,722
Russia
Malawi and Mozambique

9. Malawi
29,604
Connects
28568

10. Great Slave
Canada
USA USA
Lake Huron and Lake Superior Lake Erie and Lake Michigan
Soo Locks
USA and Canada
25,670
11 Erie
2 Erie Canal
12 , Winnipeg
Canada
24,387
Lake Vänern with the Baltic Sea ( Stockholm - Gothenburg )
Sweden
Gota Canal
19,010

13. Ontario
USA and Canada

14. Balkhash .
Kazakhstan
18,260
Germany North Sea from the River Elbe to the Baltic Sea
Kiel Canal
Nigeria , Niger and Chad , Cameroon $ 17,800
15 Chad
16 Ladoga
Russia
17,600
North Sea Canal Netherlands Amsterdam and IJmuiden on the

17.Onega 18 Eyre
9,720
Russia
North Sea coast :
9,300
Australia
Manchester England Manchester to the Irish Sea . Canal : Starting at the Mersey Estuary near Liverpool New Waterway Netherlands Rotterdam to the North Sea Volga river ( Volgograd ) and Don River ( Volgodonsk ) , between Rostov and Stalingrad

19. Titicaca
Peru Bolivia
8,300
Nicaragua Athabasca
20 ,
Nicaragua

8.157
Canada
7,936
22 Reindeer
Canada Kenya Ysyk ( Issyk ) Kul Kyrgyzstan
6,650
Volga - Don
23 : Rudolph
6,405
Canal
6,280
Welland Canal f
Sources Encyclopaedia Britannica ]
Lake
Join on Telegram @apna channels

10. Karakum
( in
North Western India and Pakistan : 2,60,000
11 Thar
Somalia ( Africa )
2,60,000
Greenland
Antarctic Ocean
21,75,000
12 Somali
North Chilie ( South America )
1,80,000
Western Pacific Ocean
New Guinea
8,21,400
13 Atakama
$ 1,80,000
Indian Ocean
Uzbekistan , Kazakhstan
Borneo Madagascar Baffin Island ( Canada ) Sumatra ( Indonesia ) Honshu ( Japan ) Britain ( Great Britain ) Victoria Island ( Canada ) 10. Ellesmere Island ( Canada ) Arctic Ocean 13 Sulawesi ( Indonesia ) ⠀ Indian Ocean 1
7,51,000
14 : Kyzyl Kum
65,000
Indian Ocean

15. Mojave ( Mohave ) South California ( USA )
$ 5,87,011
63,100

36. Sierra Nevada
USA
North Arctic Ocean .
5,07,451
52,000
Eastern Iran
42,220
17 , Dast - e - Lut
Indian Ocean
5,000
¡ Perú
18 , Sechura
North East Pacific Ocean
2,30,092
2,29,849
North Atlantic Ocean Arctic Ocean
Top 10 Countries with Largest Aquatic Area Aquatic S. Country Aquatic Areá
2,17,290
S. Country
1,96,236
Arca ( km² )
( km² )

1. Canada Russia SUSA

6. Iran
1,16,600
1,78,700
8,91,163
South Island ( New Zealand ) South Western Western Ocean
Pacific 1,50,460 .
* 7,20,500

7. Ethiopia
1,04,300

8. Columbia®
1,00,210
6,64,709
1,26,400 Pacific 1,14,687
Indian Ocean . Western
13 Java Island ( Indonesia ) 14 North Island ( New Zealand ) South
India 5 Sudan

9. Indonesia
3,14,070
93,000

10. D.R. Congo
1,29,813
77,810
Ocean
Note : All the figures in area shown above includes all kinds of aquatic bodies in the respective country including rivers waterfalls , lakes , ponds etc. Top 10 Countries with Longest Coastline
15 Cuba
Caribbean Sea
$ 1,10,922
Surrounded by . Philippine 1,04,688
16 Luzon Island
Sea , South China Sea ,
Sibuyan Sea , ( Pacific Ocean )
Country Length ( in km . ) S.
Country
Length ( in km . )

1. Canada
2,02,080

7. Australia
25,760
Atlantic Ocean
17 Iceland
103,000
2 : Norway

8. USA .
99,083
19,924 :
North Atlantic Ocean :
18 Ireland
82,460

3. Indonesia
15,134

9. New Zealand
58,133
Surrounded by Indian and Pacific Ocean ,

19.Tasmania
67,900

4. Russia
37,653

10. China
14,500

5. Philippines Japan
65,600 kiran
36,289
20 Sri Lanka
Indian Ocean
29,751 )
Note : Indonesia is the largest archipelago in the world . Major Deserts of the World Subtropical deserts are caused by circulation pattern of air masses . They are found along the Tropic of Cancer , between 15 ° and 30 ° north of the Equator or along the Tropic of Capricorn Northern Africa between 15 ° and 30 ° south of the Equator . Examples : Atacama Desert ( S. America ) , Sonorama and California Deserts ( N. America ) , Namib and Kalahari Desert ( S. Africa ) , Gibson Desert ( Australia ) , Arabian Desert and Thar Desert ( Asia ) etc.
With a total coastline length of 7,516.6 km . India is on 15 place in this list . Sed value [ Source World Atlas ] Geographical Epithets ( Sobriquets ) Blue Mountains City of Sky Scrapers City of Seven Hills * City of Dreaming Spires City of Golden Gate Cockpit of Europe China's Sorrow Dark Continent Eternal City Forbidden City
Nilgiri Hills , India New York , USA Rome , Italy Oxford , England San Francisco , USA ☐ Belgium Hwang - Ho Africa Rome
Desert
Expansion
Area ( in km )
1Sahara ( Touches Northem Africa ( Algeria , Chad , 84,00,000 the boundaries Libya , Mali , Mauritania , Niger , of 11 countries ) Sudan , Tunisia , Egypt , Morocco
Zijincheng ( Beijing ) , China Bab - el - Mandeb , Jerusalem Aberdeen , Scotland Massachusetts
Gate of Tears Granite City
and Burkina Faso ) ,
Great / Little Herring Pond Hermit Kingdom . Honeymoon Lake
Great Sandy desert , Barberton , 15,50,000 Great Victoria , Simpson , Gibson and Stuart Desert area are included South Arabia , Southee Arabia , 13,00,000 Yamen , Syria , Khali area and Nafud area are included
Australian
Korea
Titicaca Lake ( on Peru and Bolivia border in Andes ) .
Arabian .
Island Continent
Australia Zanjibar
Island of Cloves
Island of Pearls
: Bahrain
Gobi Patagonia :
Mongolia and China
10,40,000
Pearl Islands
Panama
Argentina ⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀ ****
6,70,000
Gibraltar
Key to the Mediterranean
Botswana ( Middle Africa )

6.Kalahari
5,20,000
Land of Golden Fleece
Australia
Taklimakan & Sonoran
Tsi kyang ( China )
3,20,000
Land of Mid Night Sun
Norway
Arizona and California ( USA and 3,10,000 Mexico )
Land of Rising Sun
Japan
Land of White Elephant Pearl of Antilles
Thailand
South Africa ( Namibia )
3,10,000
Namib
Cuba
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Biodiversity
Kiran The Biodiversity is acronym of Biological Diversity . The Biodiversity literally means diversity of life . The Biosphere is the measure of the variety of life forms . that is flora ( plants ) and fauna ( animals and other organism ) . In ecology , the diversities ( number & variety of species ) of flora and fauna within a given region or area is called Biodiversity . As far as variety of life possible , upto that extent there : must be biosphere . In another way , the biosphere extends to any place where life of any kind might exist . Since biosphere is the dwelling place of all organism so each and every variety of organism become part of the biosphere . > The Biodiversity and Biosphere depends on each other . Naturally , the more diverse the flora and fauna are , the more the biosphere expands to include new species of flora and fauna and the vice versa .
Ecology : Study / Science of Biosphere .
3. Biodiversity , and
Environmental Issues / Problems and Their Management / Measures : Pollution , Biodiversity Loss & Climate Change .. 1 Lithosphere , Hydrosphere & Atmosphere :
The earth comprises three spheres - Lithosphere , Hydrosphere and Atmosphere . These spheres are generally considered as land ( soil ) , water and air respectively . The study of lithosphere , hydrosphere and atmosphere is known as Geomorphology , Oceanography and Climatology respectively . 2 Ecology Study / Science of Biosphere
In other words , Biosphere is the sphere where Biodiversity exists and Biodiversity is the sum total of all organism that founds in the Biosphere . > Severe biodiverstical loss is occurring all over the world due to human activities . Many initiative had taken to recover biodiversty loss as personal , social , national & international level .
4. Environmental Issues / Problems & Their Management / Measures Pollution , Biodiversity Loss & Climate Change . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
As we know that there are three sphere of the earth namely lithosphere , hydrosphere and atmosphere . Biosphere is not a separate or fourth sphere of the earth as many think , but it is the common part of lithosphere , hydrosphere and atmosphere where life exists . Don't confuse . Biological Environment with Biosphere , because these two are different concepts . Biological Environment is a small concept compared . to Biosphere . Biological Environment includes only
. *

1. Troposphere : [ Tropos ( = rotating , changing ) + Sphaira ( = sphere ) Troposphere ] . The lowest layer of atmosphere is called the Troposphere . It is also known as Turbosphere or Convectosphere . In this layer , the temperature of air decreases with height at an average of 1 ° C for 165 metres . The troposphere extends up to an average height of 14 km ( 8 km along the poles and 18 km along the equator ) . The upper limit of the troposphere is called tropopause . Most of the weather phenomena take place in this layer . Due to rotational turbulence that mixes the layers of air and weather phenomena occur , this sphere is known as Troposphere .
Ecology is defined as the study of the relationships of organism to one another and to their physical environment : Ecology is also called Bioecology , Bionomics or Environmental biology .. There is some controversy about the person who coined the term ' ecology ' . Some scholars think that it was H. Reiter who introduced the term ' Oekologie ' ( = ecology ) in 1868 ; but most of the scholars think that : was German scientist Emst Hackel ( 1834-1919 ) who coined the term oekologie ( = ecology ) and put the first precise definition and explanation in the year 1869 .

2. Stratosphere : [ Strato ( = layer ) + Sphaira ( = sphere ) Stratosphere ] . Above the troposphere is another layer called the stratosphere The stratosphere extends up to a height of 50 km above the sea - level . [ Sea Level : Sea level is the average level of the sea . It is the base level for measuring elevation ( height ) and depth on Earth . ] In this layer , the temperature remains constant initally and then increases with height . As the stratosphere is free from clouds associated wetherna phenomena , conditions are ideal for flying of jet aircraft . The ozone in this layer absorbs harmful Ultra Violet ( UV ) radiation from the Sun.

3. Mesosphere : [ Meso ( = Middle ) + Sphaira ( = Sphere ) = Mesosphere ] . Since mesosphere is a middle ( meso = middle ) sphere betweenstratosphere and thermosphere therefore it is called the Mesosphere . This sphere lies above the stratosphere and below the thermosphere . The mesosphere extends up to a height of 80 km . Thermosphere [ Thermos ( = Heat ) + Sphaira ( Sphere ) Thermosphere ] . The fourth layer is called the Thermosphere . The thermosphere extends up to a height of about 513 km ( according to National Aeronautics and Space Administration - NASA ) . Its lower part is called the Ionosphere In the ionosphere layer , the temperature rises dramatically , reaching up to approx . 2500 ° C . This increase in temperature is due to the fact that gas molecules present in this layer absorb the Ultra - Violet and X - rays of the Sun. This results in the break up of the gas molecules into electrically charged particles called ions . These particles received the radio waves that is transmitted from the earth's surface and then reflect the radio waves back to the earth's surface . In this way , these particles make possible wireless and long distance communication . ( Long radio waves- from D - layer of ionosphere , Short radio waves - from E , E , & F , F , layers of ionosphere ) .
American biologist E.P. Odum ( 1913-2002 ) wrote in his popular textbook ' Fundamentals of Ecology " : " The word ' oekologie ' was first proposed by the Ernst Hackel in 1869. Hackel defined ecology as ' the study of the natural environment including the relations of organism to one another and to their surroundings ' . Ernst Hackel ( 1834-1919 ) is known as the father of Ecology ( classical period ) [ According to some scholars , German naturalist Alexander Von Humboldt ( 1769- 1859 ) as the father of ecology ( classical period ) ] . E.P. Odum ( 1913-2002 ) is known as the father of Modem Ecology ( Modern Period ) Ramdeo Misra ( 1908-98 ) is revered as the father of Indian Ecology . Note : In science , the period from the Beginning to 19th century ( i.e , the Beginning - 19th century ) is considered . as ' Classical Period ' and the period from 20th centrury to Till Date ( i.e. 1901 - Till Date ) as ' Modern Period ' . Like other fields of learning , the development in the field of ecology have been gradual . Ecology has progressed from Natural History and Biogeography to Ecosystem Ecology . In the last quarter of the 20th century . ( i.e 1975- 2000 ) , Global Ecologywith an emphasis on biodiversity climate change and ecological sustainability has been emerged . Global Ecology is a subfield of ecology and it treats ecology at a global scale . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Exosphere : [ Exo ( = beyond ) + Sphaira ( = Sphere ) Exosphere ] . It is outermost layer of atmosphere . The layer above the thermosphere is called the Exosphere . Since this sphere is beyond . ( exo = beyond ) the

2. Population : The term population , originally coined to denote a group of people , is broadened to include groups of individuals of any kind of organism . Hence , population is a group of individuals of a plant or animal species in habiting in a given area . For example : all individuals of roses in a area , all individuals of elephants in a area etc.
3. Community : The term community is a combination of French wordCommune ( = a group of people ) and noun suffix - ity ( = state , condition ) . Community ( sometimes designated as Biotic community ) is an assemblage of all the populations occupying in a given area . For example : all population of roses in a area , all population of elephants in a area etc.
4. Ecosystem : Ecosystem is the acronym of Ecological system . The system means a set of things that work together . The biological community and the physical environment function together as an ecological system or ecosystem . It is a fundamental functional unit of ecology , because it includes both biotic ( living ) and abiotic ( non - living ) environments . For example : Forest , grassland , desert , marine , lake , river , pond ; crop park , spacecraft , swimming pool , well , aquarium etc , Join on Telegram @apha_channels
The Level 1 to Level 3 ( organism to community ) and the level 4 to level 7 ( Ecosystem to Ecosphere / Biosphere ) are loosely synonym to one another ; they are almost Similar in traits ( characteristics ) , but differ in size and extension . Hence , we can say , organism is the reduced & compressed form of community and community is the enlarged & extended form of organism . Similary , Ecosystem is the reduced & contracted form of Biosphere and Biosphere is the enlarged & extended form of Ecosystem . This is the reason that Biosphere is called a giant ecosystem ' . Biosphere is synonym of Ecosphere . With name biosphere someone may confuse that it is concerned only to biotic / living environment , but it is not so . Itis concerned with both biotic / living environment and physical / non - living environment . Similary , with name ecosphere , don't confuse that it is concerned only to physical environment , but it is concerned with physical environment as well as biotic environment . environment as well ,
Subnote Keep these concepts well in mind . Don't take general meaning of these terms , but specific meaning whenever you tackle the questions of Ecology
field ,

1. First Trophic Level : Allgreenplants and otherproducers in the ecosystem occupy the first trophic level .
2. Second Trophic Level : Herbivores which feed on plants are placed at the second trophic level .
3. Third Trophic Level : ( Primery ) carnivores that eat herbivores occupy third trophic level .
4. Fourth Trophic Level : Top / Secondary carnivores that eat carnivore are placed at fourth trophic level . Ecological Efficiency and 10 Percent Law ( Lindeman's 10 % Law ) ➤ The different trophic levels are not equal in terms of energy available , as only a fraction of energy is transferred from lower to higher trophic level . The percentage of energy transferred from one trophic level to another trophic level is called Ecological Efficiency . The efficiency of energy transfer from one trophic level to another trophic level varies from 1 % to 10 % depending on the types of organism and environmental conditions . The 10 % law of transfer of energy was introduced by American ecologist Raymond Lindeman ( 1915-42 ) in 1942. In the terrestrial ( land - related ) ecosystem , only 10 % of plant material is eaten by herbivore . That means on an average only 10 % of energy is transferred from one tropic level to another trophic level . This means 100 kg of grain is needed to produce 10 kg of meat . Such low efficiency is due to the fact that not all the organisms present at one level become easily available . as food for the consumers at higher level . Predators may not able to capture all the prey available . Those-
the energy which passes to the herbivores does not come back to producers . As it moves progressively through the various trophic levels it is no longer available to the previous level . The movement of nutrient element through various components of an ecosystem is called Bio - geo - chemical cycle . The movement of matter in the form of mineral nutrient from the soil to the plants helps in the growth of the plants . These nutrient are consumed by herbivores and camivores for their growth . When the plants and other organisms die , decomposers like bacteria and fungi feed on them and break then down into inorganic nutrients . These are available in the soil to be recycled by plants . The flow of mineral nutrients through the system is cyclic . With respect to matter , the earth is essential a ' closed . system . Matter cannot escape from its boundries . In the words of Physics , energy can neither be created nor destroyed ; it can only be transferred one form to another form ( Law of conservation of Energy ) . The ecological system maintains its stability by continuous input of energy from the Sun and the cyclic : movement of nutrient through the system .
Bio - geo - chemical Cycle
The energy that enters the Earth's atmosphere as light and heat is balanced by the energy that is absorbed by the biosphere plus amount that leaves the Earth's surface as invisible heat radiation . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Biodiversity
What is Biodiversity ?
➤ Biodiversity is a combination of Greek word Bios ( = life ) and Latin word Diversitas ( = variety ) . Biodiversity literally means variety of life . In ecology , biodiversity refers to the diversities ( number & variety of species ) of plant and animal life within a region . In .. this way we can say , as far as the extent of biosphere , there is bio - diversity i.e. variety of life . Inversely , as far as variety of life possible , up to that extent there must bė biosphere . In our biosphere immense diversity exists . The known and described number of species of all organism on the earth is approx . 1.7-1.8 million , which is fewer than 15 % of the actual number .
Sun
Atmospheric carbon dioxide )
Photosynthesis
Levels of Biodiversity
Producers ( plants , trees )
The term Biodiversity was first coined by Walter G. Rosen ( b.1929 ) in 1985 , but this term is populated by the American sociobiologist Edward Osborne . ( E.Ó ) Wilson ( 1929-2021 ) , to describe the combined diversity at all hierarchical levels of biological organisation . E.O. Wilson is revered as the ' Father of Biodiversity ' . > Biological diversity includes three important hierarchical levels - Genetic , Species and Community & Ecosystem diversity . These levels of biodiversity are interrelated , yet distinct enough to studied separately .
1. Genetic Diversity : Genetic diversity refers to the variation of genes within species . Each species stores an @apna kiran immense amount of genetic information . For example ,
Consumers
Respiration
Decomposers
Combustion
Coal , Oil etc.
Soils :
the numbers of genes is about 35,000 to 45,000 in Homo Sapien Sapien . India has more than 50,000 genetically different strains of rice and 1,000 varieties of mango . The amount of genetic variation is the basis of speciation ( evolution of new species ) . It has a key role in the maintenance of diversity at species and community levels . Genetic diversity within a species often increases with environmental variability .
2. Species Diversity : Species diversity refers to the variety . of species within a region . For example , Western Ghats have a greater amphibion species diversity than the Eastern Ghats . Species are distinct unit of diversity , each playing a specific role in an ecosystem . Therefore , loss of species has consequences for the ecosystem as a whole .
3. Community and Ecosystem DiversityAccording to Whittaker ( 1972 ) , diversity at the level of Community : and Ecosystem has three perspectives - Alpha , Beta & Gamma diversity . Alpha Diversity Diversity of organism within- community diversity is called Alpha diversity . Alpha diversity refers to the diversity of organism sharing the same community / habitat . Beta Diversity : Diversity of organism between communities ( i.e. in ecosystem ) diversity is called Beta diversity . Gamma Diversity Diversity of habitat over the total landscape or biome is called Gamma diversity . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Fig . 10 : Carbon - Cycle
Carbon dioxide constitutes just 0.03 % by volume of the atmosphere , but yet it is vital to life ( Note : The percentage of carbon dioxide in the dissolved gaseous state / form present in the water is 0.3 % ) . Plants take carbon from carbon dioxide in the air and they use chlorophyll to gather energy from the Sun. From these inputs and water , plants make glucose . In this process of photosynthesis , plants release oxygen . Animals breathe in this oxygen , digest their food thats comes from plants . This is called carbon - cycle . In the words of mathematics : Photosynthesis process + Respiration process of ganism Combustion process of coal , oil etc .. Carbon - cycle When we burn fossil fuels like coil , oil etc. , the carbon in the fuel combines with atmospheric oxygen to form . carbon dioxide . This is called combustion process .: Since we burn a lot of fuel , there is a huge emmission of carbon dioxide . This increase in carbon dioxide concentration upsets the carbon balance in the atmosphere . There are not enough growing plants to absorb all the excess carbon dioxide .
Things become worse when we cut down forests and burn more trees .

1. Extinct ( EX )

3. Critically

4. Endangered ( EN ) ⠀⠀ When it is not critically endangered but is facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near future .
When it is not critically endangered or endangered , but is facing a high risk of extinction in the wild in the medium - term future . When species are close to becoming threatened or may meet the criteria for threatened status in the near future . 7. Least Concern ( LC ) When species are : pervasive and abundant after careful assesment . ( DD ) When there is inadequate information to make a direct or indirect assessment of its risk of : extinction . Not Evaluated ( NE ) When it has not yet been assessed against the above criteria . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Vulnerable ( VU )

6. Near Threatened ( NT )
Data Defici

17. Dibru - Saikhowa / Assam
765
Tiger , Chital , Chinkara SambarDear & Sloth Bear particularly useful for conserving vegetatively propagated crops like potato . Crypopreservation is the storage of material at ultra - low temperature either by very rapid cooling ( used for storing seeds ) , or by gradual cooling and simultaneous dehydration at low , temperature ( used for tissue culture ) . The material can be stored for a long period of time in compact , low maintenance refrigeration units .. Conservation of biological diversity in Botanical
543

18. Panna / Madhya Pradesh
ken river
Sacred Forests and Sacred Lakes
A traditional strategy for the protection of biodiversity has been in practice in India and some other Asian countries in the form of sacred forests . These are forest patches of varying dimensions protected by tribal communities due to religious sanctity accorded to them . The sacred forests represents island of pristine forest
( most undisturbed forests without any human impacthakira and have been free from all disturbances ; though these are frequently surrounded by highly degraded landscapes . In India , sacred forests are located in several parts , e.g. Khasi and Jaintia hills in Meghalaya , Aravalli Hills of Rajasthan , Western Ghat regions of Maharashtra & Karnataka , Sarguja , Chanda & Bastar areas of 6 Chhattisgarh , Kerala etc. These sacred forests are . serving as refusia for a number of rare , endangered and endemic taxa . Similary , several water bodies ( e.g. Khecheopalri Lake in Sikkim ) have been declared sacred by the people , leading to protection of aquatic flora and fauna .
2. Ex Situ ( off site ) Conservation
Gardens , Arboreta ( botanical garden where specific tree and shrub species are cultivated ) , Zoos and Aquaria .. ( plural of aquarium , a container , such as a glass container or an artificial pond in which living aquatic : plants and animals are kept ) is already in practice . Plants and animals conserved in Botanical Gardens , Arboreta , Zoos and Aquaria can be used to restore degraded land , reintroduce species into wild , and restock depleted populations . Biodiversity Conservation ( Global Efforts ) : > Biodiversity knows no political boundaries and its conservation is therefore a collective responsibitity of all nations . Ramasar ( Iran ) Convention , 1971 ( came into force in 1975 ) : It is a convention on wetlands of international importance . It provides a framework for international co - operation for the conservation of wetland habitats which have been designated to the list of wetlands of International Importance . India became a signatory to this convention in 1982 , and till date had designated 89 wetlands as Ramasar Sites ::
In this conservation , threatened plants and animals are taken out from their natural habitat and placed in special setting where they can be protected by given special care . This conservation includes Botanical Gardens , Zoos , Conservation Stands and gene , pollen , seed , seeding tissue culture and DNA banke . Seed gene banks are the easiest way to store germplasm of wild and cultivated plants at low temperature in cold rooms . Preservation of genetic resources in carried out in field gene banks under normal growing conditions . In vitro conservation , especially by crypopreservation in liquid nitrogen at a temperature of -196 ° C , is
World Heritage Convention ( Paris ) , 1972 ( came into force in 1975 ) : World Heritage Convention is a short . form of ' A convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage ' . It aimed at protecting sites of such outstanding value that their conservation is of concern to all people . This treaty is adapted in Paris in 1972. India is a member of this treaty . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2. Global Warming
Global warming is the phenomenon of gradual overall increase in the average temperature of the Earth's atmosphere due to accumulation of certain gases .. The term ' Global warming ' was popularised by British environmentalist Wallace Smith Broecker ( 1931-2019 )
in 1970 .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Ozone Depletion
Ozone layer
In the stratosphere of atmosphere , ultra violet ( UV ) radiation from the Sun causes photodissociation of ozone ( 0 ) into O , and O. But O , and O quickly recombine to form ozone ( 0 ) again . Thus , ozone is an unstable gas The dynamism of ozone dissipates the energy of ultraviolet ( UV ) ray as heat . An equilibrium is established between generation and destruction of ozone ( 03 ) , leading to a steady state concentration of ozone layer in the atmosphere between mainly 20 to 26 km above the sea level . The thickness of the vertical column of stratospheric ozone ( O₂ ) layer , condensed to standard temperature and pressure , averages 0.29 cm above the equator and may exceed 0.40 cm above the poles at the end of the winter season . This layer acts as the ozone shield protecting the earth biota ( the flora and fauna of a region ) from harmful effects of strong ultraviolet radiation . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
With increasing global warming many species are expected to shift slowly poleward , or toward high elevations in mountain areas . For example , with a global temperature

3. Ecocentric This is the conservation ethic .. Environment deserves care and consideration by itself and not out of the interests of plants & animals ( including man ) . It should be our aim to move from the current anthropocentric view to an ecocentric view . Environmental Justice : An equal justice and equal protection for all under the environment laws and : regulations without any discrimination based on race , cast , ethnicity or socio - economic status is known as Environmental Justice .
Environment Impact Assessment - EIA , 1994 ( In 1994 , EIA was made mandatory for certain types of projects e.g. nuclear power , river valley : project , ports , harbours etc. Under this regulation , the project proponent requires to submit an EIA report to Environment Ministry and after getting clearance from ministry he can initiate the project . This clearance letter is valid for 5 years . ) * . Biological Diversity Act , 2002 , Amendment in 2023 .
Environmental Movements in India Pla 1730 Khejarli village , Marwar Amrita Devi ** region , Jodhpur district . Rajasthan
S.N.
Name of Movement nol Movement **
Year
Save sacred trees from being cut down by the king's soldiers for a new palace .
( a follower of Bishnoi faith , established by Jambhoji )
Chandi Prasad Bhatt , Protect the trees on the Sundar Lal Bahuguna , Himalaya slopes from the axes Gaura Devi & others of contractors of the forest Sughantha Kumari In order to protect the Silent ( activist ) , Kerala Sastra Valley , the moist evergreen Sahitya Parishad ( an forest from being destroyed NGO ) , Salim Ali ( an by a hydroelectric project . In eminent ornithologist , a 1985 , Silent Valley declared as supporterofmovement ) National Park

2. Chipko Movement ( Chipko hug the tree )
March , Chamoli & Tehri 1973 Garhwal , Uttarakhand
1978 Silent valley , Palakkad _district district Kerala
Save Silent Valley Movement [ The valley is named as ' silent valley by a British in 1847 , because of a perceived absence of noisy cicadas ( Hindi name - Jhingur which noises as Thin - Jhin ' ) ]
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

11. Tehri Dam Conflict
1990 Bhagirathi river near Tehri in Uttarakhand
of town inhabitants and the environmental consequences of the weak ecosystem .. Tree plantation movement ( Greening / afforestation deforested mountains )

12. Malli Movement ( Malti is a 1995 Uttarakhand ( commence Kalyan Singh Rawat with Gwaldan village ) ( a teacher )
local word for hindi word mayaka i.c. Mother's house )
Can
Since Bishnoi's have followed Bishnoi [ Bish ( = Twenty ) + Noi ( = Nine ) ) principles laid down by Guru Jambhoji therefore they have called Bishnoi . These principles emphasize the conservation of plant & animal & species . ** Amrita Devi Bishnoi / Beniwal ( d.1730 ) : Amrita Devi , a follower of Bishnoi cult established by Jambhoji , sacrificed her life along with her three daughters namely Asu , Rani & Bhagu on 10th day of Shukla Paksha , Bhadra Month , in year 1730 AD to save green trees being felled by Abhay Singh , the Maharaja of Jodhpur at a place known as khejarli in Marwar , Rajasthan . Along with her more than 363 other Bishnois of khejarli village died saving the kherji trees . ( Khejarli / Khejadli : It is a
village in Jodhpur district of Rajasthan . The name of the village . ( now town ) is derived from khejri ( prospis cineraria ) trees , which were in abundance in the village . ] Government of India have started the national level Amrita Devi Bishnoi wildlife protection award ( also known as Amrita Devi Bishnoi National Award ) . ✓ for wildlife conservation . The award consists of cash * 1,00,000 and given to individuals or institution involved in wildlife protection . Government of Rajasthan have started the prestigious state level Amrita Devi Vishnoi Smriti Award for excellent contribution to the protection and conservation of wild animals . Award consists of cash 25,000 and a prashasti .
***
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Evolution of Indian Constitution Our Constitution : Our present constitution - the first Constitution of India framed and given to themselves by the people of India was adopted by the Constituent Assembly : on 26 November , 1949. It came into full operation with effect from 26 January , 1950. The Constitution as originally adopted had 22 parts , 395 articles and 8 schedules . Its present text is as amended from time to time . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

13. Dr.Shyama Prasad Mukherji Industries and Supplies 14. V.N. Gadgil ***** Work , Mines and Power > From the 15th August , 1947 India ceased to be a Dependency , and the suzerainty of the British Crown over the Indian States and the treaty relations with Tribal Areas lapsed from that date . In a referendum held on 6 July , 1947 Sylhet ( Assam ) had decided to join the province of East Bengal ( to be a part of a new country Pakistan ) . The office of the Secretary of State for India was abolished . The Governor - General and the Governors lost extraordinary powers of legislations to compete with the Legislature . The Central Legislature of India , composed of the Legislative Assembly and the Council of States , ceased to exist on August 14 , 1947 . The Constituent Assembly itself was to function also as the Central Legislature with complete sovereignty .
The plan for transfer of power to the Indians and partition of the country was laid down in the Mountbatten Plan . It was given a formal shape by a statement made by the British Government on 3rd June , 1947 . The Indian Independence Act , 1947 of the British Parliament > In pursuance of this Act , the Government of India Act , 1935 was amended by the Adaptation Orders , both in
☐ >
India and Pakistan , for setting up an interim ConstituentPna_kiran , Constituent Assembly and Making
Assembly to draw up the future Constitution of the country .. Interim Government ( Sept. 2 , 1946 ) ( As per the proposal of Cabinet Mission in 1945 ) ( S. ☑Members Members 1Jawaharlal Nehru
of the Constitution *
The Cabinet Mission envisaged the establishment of a - Constituent Assembly to frame a Constitution for the country . Members of the Constituent Assembly were elected by the Provincial Legislative Assemblies . Each Province and each Indian State were allotted seats in proportion of its population , roughly in the ratio of one to a million . The seats so ascertained were . distributed among the main communities in each * Province . The main communities recognised were Sikh , 6. Muslim and Generale Important Committees of the Constituent Assembly and their Chairman
Portfolios Held as Vice - PresidentoftheCouncil ; External Affairs & Commonwealth Relations Home , Information and Broadc Food and Agriculture Industries and Supplies Labour
2 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Dr. Rajendra Prasad

4. Dr. John Mathai
5 Jagjivan Ram 6. Sardar Baldev Singh 7 C.H. Bhabha 8 Liaquat Ali Khan 9 Abdur Rab Nishtar 10 Asaf Ali 11C Rajagopalachari 1211 Chundrigar 13 : Ghazanfar Ali Khan 14 Joginder Nath Mandal
Defence
Works , Mines and Power Finance Posts and Air Railways and Transport Education and Arts Commerce
Name of the Committee
Chairman
Committee on the Rules of Procedure Steering Committee 3 : Finance and Staff Committee Ad hoc Committee on the National Flag 5 Union Constitution Committee Union Powers Committee . 7 States Committee
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Health
Law
First Cabinet of Independent India ( 1947 )
Pt . Jawahar Lal Nehru
S. Members
Portfolios Held – Prime Minister ; External Affairs Commonwealth Relations , Scientific Research Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Home , Information
Jawaharlal Nehru
Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights , Minorities and Tribal and Excluded Areas
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
Dr. BR Ambedkar Alladi Krishnaswami
Drafting Committee 10 Credential Committ
Broadcasting : States Food and Agriculture .
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
Ayyar
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

4. Important Parts , Articles of the Constitution
Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part Directive Principles of State Policy
Art . 35
Articles
Subject
The Union and its territory ..
Part - I Part - II Part - III
Art . 14
Part IV
Citizenship
Art . 5-11
Definition
Art . 36
Fundamental Rights
Application of the principles contained in this Part State to secure a social order for the promotion . of welfare of the people Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State Equal justice and free legal aid Organisation of village panchayats Parts of Indian Constitution Provisions .
Art . 37
Definition
Art . 12
Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the
Art . 38
Art . 13
fundamental rights .
Art . 39
Equality
Right to
Equality before law
Art . 14
Art . 39A
Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion , race , caste , sex or place of birth
Art . 15
Art . 40
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment
Art . 16
Fart
Abolition of untouchability
Preamble
Art . 17
The Union and its Territory
1 to 1
Abolition of titles
Art . 18
5 to 11
Citizenship Fundamental Rights Directive Principles of State Policy Fundamental Duties The Union
Right to Freedom
III
12 to 35
Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech etc.
Art . 19
36 to 51
IVA 51 A
* Protection in respect of conviction for offences
Art . 20
52 to 151
Protection of life and personal liberty
152 to 237
The States :
Art . 21
VII
The States in part B of the first Schedule The Union Territories
238
Right to education
Art . 21A
Protection against arrest and detention in certain na VIII 239 to 242
Art . 22
Xan 243 to 2430
The Panchayats :
cases
IX A : 243 P. to 243 ZG The Municipalities DXB 243 ZH to 243 ZT The Co - operative Societies , The Scheduled and Tribal Areas Relations between the Union and the States
Right against Exploitation
Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour
Art . 23 °
244 to 244A
245 to 263
Prohibition of employment of children in factories etc.
Art . 24
XII
264 to 300 A
Finance , Property , Contracts and Suits Trade , Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India
XIII 301 to 3073
Right to Freedom of Religion
Services under the Union and the States BTribunals
XIV . 308 to 323 XIVA 323 A to 323 XV 324 to 329 A XVI 330 to 342 . XVII 343 to 351 XVIII 352 to 360 XIX 361 to 367 XX 368
Freedom of conscience and free profession , practice and propagation of religion Freedom to manage religious affairs Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain , educational institutions Cultural and Educational Rights Protection of interests of minorities
Art . 25
Elections
Art . 26 Art . 27 .
Special Provisions relating to certain class Official Language Emergency Provisions Miscellaneous
Art . 28
Amendment of the Constitution
XXI 369 to 392 Temporary , Transitional and Special
Provisions
XXII 393 to 395 :
Short title , Commencement , Authoritative Text in Hindi and Repeals
Art . 29
Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions
Art . 30
Right to work , to education and to public assistance in certain cases
Art . 41
Saving of certain Laws
Provision for just and humane . conditions of work and maternity relief
Art . 42
Art . 31A Saving of laws providing for acquisition of
estates etc.
Living wage etc for workers y
Art . 43
Validation of certain Acts and Regulations Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles Constitutional Remedies Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by
Art . 31B
Participation of workers in management of industries Art . 43B : The State shall endeavour to promote voluntary formation , autonomous functioning , democratic control and professional management of co - operative societies . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Art . 43A
Art . 31C
Right to Art . 32
this Part

6. Special Features of Indian Constitution > The Constitution of India is the lengthiest and the . most comprehensive of all the written constitutions of the world . > Originally the Constitution of India consisted of 395 Articles divided into 22 parts and 8 Schedules . > Unlike the federal Constitutions of the USA and Australia the Indian Constitution lays down provisions relating to the Governmental machinery not only in the Centre but also in the States .
The Indian Constitution provides for matters of administrative detail . > The Constitution contains detailed provisions relating to Centre - State relations including the emergency provisions . Special status has been given to Jammu & Kashmir and some other states such as Nagaland , Mizoram , Assam , Gujarat etc. Under the Constitution the people of India are the ultimate sovereign .
nd Schedule Part'A '
Number of Articles
Salary and emoluments of the President and Governors of the States
Due to the exercise of adding and subtracting ' the ' Insertions and Repeals of various Articles / Clauses made by the Amendments to the Constitution , the confusion / dilema about the number of Articles has prevailed . But , the changes made by the Amendments were named ' Clauses of some Articles and not Separate Articles . Hence , technically there are only 395 Articles in the Constitution of India .
Omitted
Part B ' Part ' C '
Salary and emoluments of the Speaker / Deputy Speaker or Chairman / Vice Chairman of the Lok Sabha , Rajya Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies or Councils .
المالية
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

8. The Preamble
The Preamble to the Constitution states the object which the Constitution seeks to establish and promote , and also aids the legal interpretation of the Constitution where the language is found ambiguous .
The ideals embodied in the Objectives Resolution is faithfully reflected in the Preamble to the Constitution , which , as amended in 1976 , summarise the aims and objects of the Constitution .

7. Federal and Unitary Features of the Indian Union India is different from the United States of America because in United States the federation is based on an agreement between different States and the States have the right to secede from the Union . The Indian Constitution has the features both of federal and unitary forms of Government . Federal features * Distribution of powers between Union and the States has been made as per the three lists .
Text of the Preamble
> We , the People of India having solemnly resolved . to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist Secular Democratic Republic and to secure to all citizens : Justice , social , economic and political ; Liberty of thought , expression , belief , faith and worship ; Equality of status and of opportunity ; And to promote among them all ; Fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation ; Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. The third form of integration was the consolidation of groups of states into new viable units , known as Union of States . * As many as 275 states were integrated into 5 Unions - Madhya Bharat , Patiala and East Punjab States Union , Rajasthan , Saurashtra and Travancore Cochin . These were included in the States in Part B of the First Schedule . The other three States included in Part B were- · Hyderabad , Jammu and Kashmir and Mysore . * Jammu and Kashmir acceded to India on October 26 , 1947 , and so it was included as a state in Part B , but the Government of India agreed to take the accession subject to confirmation by the people of the state , and a Constituent Assembly of J & K. The Constituent Assembly subsequently confirmed it , in November , 1956. Thenceafter , Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir was drafted which came into force on the 26 January , 1957. Earlier on 15 February , 1954 the assembly ( State assembly ) members who were present cast a unanimous vote ratifying the state's accession to India . * Hyderabad did not formally accede to India , but the Nizam issued a Proclamation recognising the necessity of entering into a constitutional relationship with the Union of India and accepting the Constitution of India subject to ratification by the Constituent Assembly of the State , and the Constituent Assembly of that state ratified this . kiraunions as well as the Rulers of Hyderabad , Mysore , ✓ It is noteworthy here that the Rajpramukhs of the five Jammu and Kashmir all adopted the Constitution of India , by Proclamations . - The process of integration culminated in the Constitution ( 7th Amendment ) Act , 1956 , which abolished Part B states as a class and included all the states in Part A and B in one list . The special provisions in the constitution relating to Part B states were , consequently omitted . The Indian States thus lost their identity and become an uniform political organisation embodied in the Constitution of India .

9. Lapse of Paramountcy When the Indian Independence Act 1947 was passed , it declared the lapse of suzerainty ( paramountcy ) of the crown in sec . 7 ( i ) ( b ) of the Act . As from the appointed day - the suzerainty of His Majesty over the Indian States lapses , and with it , all treaties and agreements in force at the date of the passing of this Act between His Majesty and the rulers of Indian States , all functions exercisable by His Majesty at the date with respect to Indian States , all obligations of His Majesty existing at that date towards Indian States or the rulers thereof , and all powers , rights , authority , or jurisdiction exercisable by His Majesty at that date in or in relation to Indian States by treaty , grant , usage na
sufferance or otherwise ....... Of the states situated within the geographical boundaries of the Dominion of India , all ( numbering 552 ) save Hyderabad , Kashmir , Bahawalpur , Junagarh and the N.W.F. ( North - West Frontier ) states ( Chitral , Phulra , Dir , Swat and Amb ) had acceded to the Dominion of India by the 15th August , 1947 , i.e. before the appointed day itself . 10. Integration and Merger of Indian States Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel and V.P. Menon played the most important role in the integration and merger of Indian States ... The main objective of shaping the Indian States into sizeable or viable administrative units was sought to be achieved by a three - fold process of integration ( known as the Patel Scheme " after Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel , Minister - in - charge of Home Affairs ) - 216 states were merged into respective Provinces , geographically contiguous ( connected ) to then . * These merged states were included in the territories . of the states in Part B in the First Schedule of the : constitution . The process of merger started with the merger of Orissa and Chhattisgarh States with the then Province of Orissa on January 1 , 1948 ; 61 states were converted into Centrally administered areas and included in Part C of the First Schedule of the Constitution .

11. The Union and its Territories Article 1 lays - down that India , i.e. Bharat , shall be a Union of States . The Territory of India shall consist of
1. the Territories of the States ,
2. the Union Territories specified in the First Schedule and
3. Such other Territories as may be acquired . Article 1 of the Constitution describes India as a Union ☐ of States not as a federation of states . Union of India . is not the result of an agreement , nor has any State the right to secede from it . The Federation is called a Union of States , because it is indestructible . The Union Territories are not included in the ‘ Union of States ' . Whereas the expression ' Territory of India ' includes the States , the Union Territories and such other territories as may be acquired by India . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

13. Citizenship .
The Constitution of India provides for a single and uniform citizenship for whole of India .
Citizenship of India was granted to every person who domiciled in the territory of India at the commencement of the constitution and who was born in the territory of India or Either of whose parents was born in the territory of India or

1. Right to equality
2. Right to liberty ( particular freedoms )
3. Right against exploitation
4. Right to freedom of religion 5. Cultural and educational rights 6. Right to constitutional remedies Article 14 of the constitution provides that the State shall not deny any person equality before the law or equal protection of the laws within the territory of India . Right to Property : .
Under Article 16 ( 4 ) provisions can be made in favour of the backward classes in the matter of employment by Executive orders also . Backward class of citizens is not defined in the Constitution . A caste may also constitute a class . The backwardness contemplated by Art . 16 ( 4 ) is mainly social It need not be both social and educational : Income or the extent of property can be taken as a measure of social advancement and on that basis the ' creamy layer of a given caste can be excluded . The reservations contemplated in Art . 16 ( 4 ) should not exceed 50 % Reservation of posts under Art . 16 ( 4 ) is confined to initial appointment only and cannot extend to providing reservation in promotion . Note : Mandal Commission was set up in 1979 under the Chairmanship of Bindeshwari Prasad ( B.P. ) Mandal , MP . ( Former Chief Minister of Bihar ) . - The 77th Amendment has provided to continue . reservation in promotion for the S.C. and S.T. Identification of backward classes is subject to judicial review .. Article : 17 ensures Abolition of Untouchability . The word ' untouchability has not been defined either in the Constitution or in the relevant Act of Parliament . It has been assumed that the word has a well known connotation . Article 18 ensures Abolition of titles . It prevents the State from conferring any title ... ) This ban is only against the State and not against other . public institutions , such as Universities . The State is not debarred from awarding military or academic distinctions , even though they may be used as titles ... The State is not prevented from conferring any distinction or award which can not be used as a title . Bharat Ratna or Padma Vibhushan can not be used . by the recipient as a title and therefore does not.come within the Constitutional prohibition . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
@apnak
> The right to acquire , hold and dispose of the property has been ceased to be a fundamental right , but it continues to be a legal or constitutional right . [ Art . 300A ] Exceptions to the provision of equality before law , allowed by the Indian Constitution are :
The President or the Governor of a State is not answerable to any Court for the exercise and perfor - mance of the powers and duties of his office . No criminal proceeding can be instituted or continued against the President or a Governor in any Court during his term of office . No civil proceeding in which relief is claimed against the President or the Governor of a State can be instituted during his term of office in any Court in respect of any act done by him in his personal capacity , without a prior notice of two months . The above immunities do not bar ( a ) Impeachment . proceedings against the President . ( b ) Suits or other appropriate proceedings against the Government of India or the Government of a State .. Exceptions acknowledged by the comity of nations in every civilized country , in favour of foreign Sovereigns . and ambassadors . * The guarantee of ' equal protection ' is a guarantee of equal treatment of persons in ' equal circumstances ' , permitting differentiation in different circumstances . Article 15 of the Constitution states that : The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion , race , caste , sex , place of birth or any of them .

15. The Writs
For enforcement of fundamental rights , the judiciary has been armed with the power to issue the writs . The power to issue these writs for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights is given by the Constitution to the Supreme Court ( Ref .: Art . 32 ) and High Courts . [ Ref .: Art . 226 ] > Supreme Court has the power to issue writs only for the purpose of enforcement of the Fundamental Rights whereas under Art . 226 a High Court can issue writs for the purpose of enforcement of Fundamental Rights and / or for the redress of any other injury or illegality . Supreme Court can issue a writ against any person or @ ap > Government within the territory of India , while High Court can issue a writ against a person , Government or other authority only if they are located within the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court .
any
apta
> A writ of Habeas Corpus calls upon the person who has detained another to produce the latter before the court , in order to let the court know on what ground he has been confined and to set him free if there is no legal justification for the imprisonment . The words ' habeas corpus ' literally mean ' to have a body ' .. This writ may be addressed to an official or a private person , who has another person in his custody . > Mandamus literally means a command . It commands the person to whom it is addressed to perform some public or quasi - public legal duty which he has refused to perform and the performance of which can not be enforced by any other adequate legal remedy . Mandamus can not be granted against the President , or the Governor of a state , for the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of his office .. The writ ofprohibition is a writ issued by the Supreme Court or a High Court to an inferior court forbidding the latter to continue proceeding therein in excess if its jurisdiction or to usurp a jurisdiction with which it is not legally vested . While mandamus is available not only against judicial authorities but also against administrative authorities , prohibition and certiorari are issued only against judicial or quasi - judicial authorities .
Right to Information
Right to information has been granted to every citizen of India under Right to information Act , 2005 which came into force on 12th October , 2005 . It is not a Fundamental Right but it entails a clause for penalty in case of delay in giving information to the applicant . > Information Commission has been set - up at central and state levels to oversee implementation of the Act .

16. Directive Principles of State Policy : The Directive Principles are contained in Part IV of the Constitution . They aim at providing the social and economic base of a genuine democracy . Important Directive Principles ☐ Broadly speaking , there are three types of Directive Principles aimed at providing social and economic justice and ushering in a welfare state .
1. Socio - Economic Principles : They require the State : ( a ) to provide adequate means of livelihood to all citizens ; to prevent concentration of wealth and means of production and ensure equitable distribution of wealth and material resources ;
( b )
Though prohibition and certiorari are both issued against Courts or Tribunals exercising judicial or quasi-
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions the National Flag and the National Anthem ;

2. to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our National Struggle for freedom ;
3. to uphold and protect the sovereignty , unity and integrity India ;

4. to defend the country ; "

5. to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India ; 6. to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture 7 to protect and improve the natural environment ; 8 , to develop the scientific temper and spirit of inquiry ; 9. to safeguard public property ; 10. to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity . 11 to provide opportunities for education to his child or ward as the case may be between the age of six and fourteen years . Note : The 11th Fundamental Duty was added by the 86 Constitutional Amendment Act , 2002 .
Difference Between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles Fundamental rights constitute limitations upon State action , while the Directive Principles are instruments of instruction to the Government . The directives require to be implemented by legislation while fundamental rights are already provided in the Constitution The Directives are not enforceable in the Courts and do not create any Justiciable rights in favour of the individuals , while the Fundamental Rights are enforceable by the Courts [ RefArts . 32 , 37 , 226 ( 1 ) ] In case of any conflict between fundamental rights and directive principles the former should prevail in the Courts . 42 Amendment Actensured that though the directives themselves are not directly enforceable it would be totally immune from unconstitutionality on the ground of contravention of the fundamental rights conferred by Arts 14 and 19 .
There is no provision in the Constitution for dired enforcement of any of the Fundamental Duties nor for any sanction to prevent their violation . 18. Procedure for Amending the Constitution > The alteration of certain provisions of the Constitutio are not considered amendment of the constitution . Sud provisions can be altered by the Parliament by a simp majority . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

21. Executive of the Union ⠀ The President ( Art . 52 )
Power of Executive of the Union is vested in the President of India ( Art . 53 ) . President is the head of the Union Executive di
The
President is the 1st Citizen of India and acts as the symbol of unity , integrity and solidarity of the nation . The President of India is indirectly elected by an electoral college , in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote The electoral college for the President consists of : The elected members of both Houses of Parliament ; * The elected members of the Legislative Assemblies the states ; and The elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of Union Territories of Delhi and Pondicherry ( now ) Puducherry )
Constitutional Amendment Act , 2018 ( DoA * : 11.08.2018 ) : This Act provides constitutional status to the National Commission for Backward Classes ( NCBC ) . A Article 338 - B and Art . 342 A have been inserted in the Constitution after this amendment , besides the modification of Articles 338 and 366 .
102nd
new
Ref .: Art 5
103rd Constitutional Amendment Act , 2019 ( DoA 12.01.2019 ) : The Act amends Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution by adding a clause which allows states to make " special provision for the advancement of any economically
In the President's election vote value of an
Total population of the state
MLA =
÷ 1000 .
Total number of elected
weaker section on Telegram @apna_channels
1w.e.f. 16.09.2016

1.Dr. Rajendra Prasad ( 1884-1963 ) 2.Dr. S. Radhakrishnan ( 1888-1975 ) 3.Dr. Zakir Hussain ( 1897-1969 ) 4S V.V. Giri ( 1894-1980 ) 5.Dr. Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed ( 1905-1977 )
26 Jan. , 1950-13 May , 1962 13 May , 1962-13 May , 1967 13 May , 1967-03 May , 1969 , 24Aug , 1969-24 Aug. , 1974 24 Aug 1974-11 Feb. , 1977
him real powers .
Qualifications for election as President are :
Be a citizen of India ;

6.Sri N. Sanjeeva Reddy ( 1913-1996 ) 7.Giani Zail Singh ( 1916-1994 ) 8.Sri R. Venkataraman ( 1910-2009 ) 9.Dr.Shankar Dayal Sharma ( 1918-1999 ) 10.Sri K. R. Narayanan ( 1920-2005 ) 11 Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam ( 1931-2015 ) 12.Smt . Pratibha DeviSingh Patil ( b.1934 ) 13 : Sri Pranab Mukherjee ( b . 1935 ) 14 Sri Ram Nath Kovind ( b . 1945 ) 15.Smt . DraupadiMurmu ( b.20.06.1958 ) 25 July , 2022- 25 July , 1977-25 July , 1982 25 July , 1982-25 July , 1987 25 July , 1987-25 July 1992 25 July , 1992-25 July , 1997 25 July , 1997-25 July , 2002 25 July , 2002-25 July , 2007 25 July , 2007-25 July , 2012 25 July 2012-25 July , 2017 25 July , 2017-24 July , 2022
* Have completed the age of thirty - five ( 35 ) years ; Be qualified for election as a member of the House of the People ; and Must not hold any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the Control of any of the said Governments [ Art . 58 ] A sitting President or Vice - President of the Union or the Governor of any state or a Minister either for the Union or for any state is not disqualified for election as President [ Ref .: Art . 58 ] The President's term of office is five years from the date . on which he enters upon his office .
Acting Presidents
1 Sri V.V.Giri
13 May 1969-20 July , 1969 20 July 1969-24 Aug 1969 11 Feb 1977-2
➤ President can submit resignation in writing under his hand addressed to the Vice - President of India ... The only ground for impeachment of President specified in Art 61 ( 1 ) is ' violation of the Constitution . An impeachment is a quasi - judicial procedure in Parliament .
Justice Md . Hidayatullah Sri B.D. Jatti
@apn
1977 25 July 1977
Dr. Zakir Hussain
( died on 3 May , 1969 ) Sri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed ( died on 11 Feb , 1977 ) > The outgoing President continues to hold office , ☐☐ notwithstanding that his term has expired , until his successor enters upon the office . [ Ref .: Art 56 ( 1 ) ( c ) ] There is no scope for the Vice - President getting a chance to act as President in this case . ➤ If vacancy arises other than by expiry of the term an election to fill the vacancy must be held within six months from the date of occurrence of the vacancy . If a mid - term vacancy arises in the office of the President , Vice - President acts as President until a new President is elected . Increase in the Emoluments of President , Vice President and the Governor The Budget 2018-19 proposes to revise emoluments to lakh for the President , 4 lakh for the Vice President and 33.5 lakh per month to Governor . These emoluments were last revised in 2006 . With regard to the emoluments paid to the Members of Parliament , the Finance Minister proposed necessary changes torefix thesalary and allowances with effect from April 1 , 2018 . According to him ( FM ) the law will also provide for automatic revision of emoluments every five years indexed to inflation .
Either House may prefer the charge of violation of the Constitution by the President provided that : A resolution containing the proposal is moved after a 14 days ' notice in writing signed by not less than 1/4 of the total number of members of that House ; and The resolution is then passed by a majority of not less than 2/3 of the total membership of the House . Charge preferred by one House is investigated by the other House . The President has a right to appear and to be represented at such investigation .
If a resolution is passed by not less than 2/3 of the total membership of the investigating House declaring that the charge had sustained , the President shall be removed from office . [ Ref .: Art . 61 ] > The President shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State . If a member of either House of Parliament or a House of the Legislature of any State is elected President , he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House . A vacancy in the office of the President can be caused in any of the following ways : On the expiry of his term of five years .
Powers of President
Administrative power
The President is the formal head of the administration . All executive actions of the Union are expressed to be : taken in the name of the Président . Ref . Art . 77 * By his resignatio Join on Telegram @apna_channels
_ :
* By his death .

22. Emergency Provisions President can make proclamation of emergency under Art . 352 in case of war , external aggression or armed rebellion or threat thereof only on recommendation of the Cabinet . Every such proclamation must be laid before Parliament and it ceases to be in operation unless it is approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament with special majority within one month from the date of its issue . The proclamation gets a fresh lease of 6 months from
the date it is apprgoin on Telegram @apna_channels proved by both Houses of Parliament.transferable vote .

3. V.V.Giri
1967-1969
4Gopal Swaroop Pathak
1969-1974
President .
B.D. Jatti
1974-1979
When the Vice - President acts as President , he gets the emoluments of the President and will not be entitled for the salary or emolument of the Vice - President fo the period [ Art . 97 ] ; otherwise , he gets the salary of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha . When the Vice - Presiden acts as President , the Deputy Chairman of the Rajy Sabha acts as its Chairman . [ Art . 91 Determination of doubts and disputes relating to the election of a President or Vice - President is described in Art . 71. Main provisions are as follows : * Such disputes are decided by the Supreme Court whos jurisdiction is exclusive and final .
Justice Md . Hidayatullah
1979-1984
R.Venkataraman
1984-1987
@apna kiran

8. Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma
1987-1992
9KR Narayanan
1992-1997
$ 100 Krishnakant
1997-2002
11 Bhairon Singh Shekhawat
2002-10.08.2007

12. Md . Hamid Ansari

11.08.2007-11.08.2017 11.08.2017 10.08.2022 10.08.2022

13. M.Venkaiya Naidu
Jagdeep Dhankhar
Term of the office of Vice - President is five years from the date on which he enters upon his office . Office of Vice - President may terminate earlier than the fixed -term either by resignation or by removal . A formal impeachment is not required for Vice- President's removal .
No such dispute can be raised on the ground . of an vacancy in the electoral college . ★ If the election of the President or the Vice - Presidente declared void by the Supreme Court , acts done by hir prior to the date of such decision of the Supreme Cou is not invalidated . * Matters other than the decision of such disputes an regulated by law made by Parliament . 24. The Prime Minister and The Union Council of Ministers Ina parliamentary system of Government , the Prime Minister occupies a unique position as the most powerful functiona who controls both the Parliament and the Executive .
Vice - President can be removed by a resolution of the Rajya Sabha passed by a majority of its members and agreed to by the Lok Sabha .
[ Ref .: Art 67 ]
A sitting Vice - President is eligible for re - election ...
Prime Ministers of India Tenure August 15 , 1947 - May 27 , 1964 May 27 1964 - June 9 1964
Party
ame
Shri Jawaharlal Nehru Shri Gulzari Lal Nanda Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri ulzari Lal Nanda MisAndira Gandhi Shri Morarji Des
Congress
Congress
June 9 , 1964 January 11 , 1966
Congress
January 11 , 1966 - January 24 , 1966
Congress
January 24 , 1966 - March 24 , 1977
Congress
March 24/1977 July 28 1979
Janata Party
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. The Prime Ministers , defeated by vote of no confidence
> The PM is the channel of communication between the Council of Ministers and the President . Ministers get the salaries and allowances etc as payable to members of parliament . In addition they get a sumptuary allowance at a varying scale and a residence , free of rent . Cabinet Ministers attend meeting of the Cabinet . > Ministers of State are not members of the Cabinet and they can attend a Cabinet Meeting only if invited to attend any particular meeting .. A Deputy Minister assists the Minister in discharge of . his duties and takes no part in Cabinet meetings . @apna_kiran There is no bar to the appointment of a non - MP as
are
V.P. Singh in 1990 , ( b ) Atal Bihari Vajpayee in 1996 ( a ) ( defeated by only one vote ) and ( c ) H.D. Deve Gowda
in 1997 .

2. Three Prime Ministers who died in office were ( a ) Jawaharlal Nehru in May , 1964 , ( b ) Lal Bahadur Shastri in January , 1966 ( in Tashkent ) , and ( c ) Mrs. Indira Gandhi on 31st October , 1984 .
3. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel was the first Deputy Prime Minister of India .
4. Jawaharlal Nehru had the longest tenure as the Prime Minister ( 16 years , 9 months , 12 days ) .

5. Atal Bihari Vajpayee was the Prime Minister for the shortest period of 13 days . 6. V.P. Singh was the first Prime Minister to loose- confidence of the House . 7. Jagjivan Ram has the record in his credit to remain in Central Cabinet for the longest period ( 32 years ) . Rajya Sabha Member , who became Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
Minister , but he cannot continue as Minister for more than 6 months unless he secures a seat in either House of Parliament . Though the ministers are collectively responsible to the legislature , they are individually responsible to the President . A Minister can take part in the proceedings of both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha , but he / she can vote only if he / she is a member of that House .
1966-1967
H.D. Devegowda ¡ I.K. Gujral Dr. Manmohan Singh
1996-1997
1997-1998
2004-2014

25. The Attorney - General for India The Attorney - General is the first Law Officer of the Government of India , who gives advice on legal matters and performs other duties of a legal character as assigned to him by the President . The Attorney - General for India is appointed by the President and holds office during the pleasure of the President . He must have the same qualifications as are required to be a judge of the Supreme Court . He discharges the functions conferred on him by the Constitution or any other law . [ Ref . Art . 76 ] The Attorney - General for India is not a member of the Cabinet . But he has the right to speak in the Houses of Parliament or in any Committee thereof , but he has no right to vote [ Ref.:Art 88 ] He is entitled to the privileges of a member of Parliament [ Art . 105 ( 4 ) ] . In the performance of his official duties , the Attorney - General has the right of audience in all Courts in the territory of India : and stand diff the Telegram @apna_channels
Prime Minister is appointed by the President . Other . ministers are appointed and / or dismissed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister . ... Prime Minister , must be the leader of the party in majority in the Lok Sabha or a person who can win the confidence of the majority in that House ... Prime Minister + Cabinet Ministers = The Council of Ministers . There are three types of ministers- ( a ) Cabinet Minister ( b ) Minister of State and ( c ) Deputy Minister . As the head of the Council of Ministers , the Prime Minister ( PM ) is the head of the Government . Also , he / she is the leader of his / her party or / and of a coalition of parties in Parliament and usually the Leader of the Popular House . The PM enjoys large powers of patronage . All the ministers are appointed at his / her recommendation
her '

26. The Comptroller and Auditor General The Supreme Audit Institution of India is headed by . the Comptroller and Auditor General of India ( CAG ) a constitutional authority to ensure accountability of the executive to the Legislature . In the states the CAG is represented by Accountants General . Articles 148 to 151 of the Constitution of India ensure the unique role . for the CAG in the chain of legislative accountability . His salary and conditions of service are laid down by Parliament and can not be varied to his disadvantage . during his term of office ... The term of office of the Comptroller and Auditor- · General ( CAG ) is 6 years from the date on which he assumes office . CAG vacates office on attaining the age of 65 years even without completing the 6 - year term . He can resign by writing under his hand , addressed to the President of India . He can be removed by impeachment . [ Ref . : Arts . 148 ( 1 ) ; 124 ( 4 ) ] · His salary is equal to that of a Judge of the Supreme . Court ... Other conditions of his service are similar to an I.
A. S. of the rank of Secretary to the Government of India . He is disqualified for any further Government office after retirement . The salaries etc of the Comptroller and Auditor- General and his staff and the administrative expenses of his office are charged upon the Consolidated Punda i Art . 148 ( 6 ) ] The main duties of the Comptroller and Auditor- General are : of India and thus non - votable .
Control of the Cabinet .
Criticism of the Cabinet and of individual Minister .
Parliament secures the information authoritatively . Legislation i . e . making laws [ Ref.:Arts . 107 : 108 ; 245 ) .
* Financial control .
Bill passed by the House of Parliament can not become law without the President's assent . > The building of Parliament is a circular structure designed by architect Sir Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker in 1912-13 . The foundation of this building was laid down on 12.02.1921 . Its external consists 144 pillars . of granite . US President who addressed Indian Parliament ☐ President
Year of Visit
Dwight David Eisenhower
1959
Jimmy Carter Bill Clinton Barack Obama
1978
2000 .
2010
US President who did not address Indian Parliament despite visiting India
Richard Nixon George Walker Bush ( Jr. ) Donald Trump
1969
2006 :
2020
kiran
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha > The Rajya Sabha is composed of not more than 250 members of whom 12 are nominated by the President and 238 are representatives of the states and the Union Territories élected by the method of indirect election . [ Ref.:Art . 80 ] The 12 nominated members are chosen by the President from amongst persons specialised in science , art , literature and social service . > The Rajya Sabha is not subject to dissolution . Its members shall not be less than 30 of age . years Representatives of each State are elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the state in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote . Prescribed composition of the Lok Sabhais ( Art . 81 ] : * Not more than 530 representatives of the States ; * Not more than 20 representatives of Union Territories . * Not more than 2 members of the Anglo - Indian community , nominated by the President . The Lok Sabha at present consists of 543 members ( 530 members are directly elected from the States and 13 from UTs ) . The representatives of the States are directly elected by the people of the States on the basis of adult suffrage . Every citizen who is not less than 18 years of age and is not otherwise disqualified is entitled to vote at such : election . [ Ref . Art . 326 ] Join on Telegram @apna_channels
To audit and report on all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and of each state and each Union Territory having a Legislative Assembly as to whether such expenditure has been in accordance with the law . To audit and report on all expenditure from the . Contingency Funds and Public Accounts of the Union and of the states .. To audit and report on all trading manufacturing profit and loss accounts etc kept by any department of the Union or a state . To see that rules and procedures in that behalf are designed to secure an effective check on the assessment , collection and proper allocation of revenue . To audit and report on the receipts and expenditure of all bodies and authorities substantially financed from the Union or State revenues , Government companies ; and other corporations or bodies , if so required by the laws relating to such corporations or bodies .
Shri V Narhari Rao ( 1948 to 1954 ) was the first Indian Comptroller Independence . Shri Girish Chandra Murmu is the present CAG of India . and Auditor General soon after 27. The Parliament of India The Parliament of India consists of the President , the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha . [ Ref.:Art . 79 ]

5. Passage in the other House , 6. President's Assent .
1st Chairman / Dy . Chairman of Rajya Sabha ,
1 Chairman
Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan ( 13.05.1952 to 12.05.1962 ) 1 Dy . Chairman
Parliament passed Bill to Repeal 58 Archaic Laws Parliament on August 2 , 2019 passed a bill to repeal 58 old central laws which the government said has been done to achieve maximum governance . The Repealing and Amending Bill , 2019 was passed by the Rajya Sabha through voice vote . It was passed by the Lok Sabha on July 29 , 2019 . Money Bills and Financial Bills . > A Bill is called Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters . * The imposition , abolition , remission , alteration ör regulation of any tax .
verm
S.V. Krishnamoorthy Rao ( 31.05.1952 to 01.03.1962 ) 1 Dy . Chairperson ( Female ) Smt . Violet Alva
( 19.04.1962 to 16.11.1969 ) .
The Chairman may be removed from his office only if he is removed from the office of the Vice - President . The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman will not preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under consideration .
[ Art . 92 ] The powers of Chairman in the Rajya Sabha are similar to those of the Speaker in the Lok Sabha except that the Speaker has certain special powers like certifying a Money Bill , or presiding over a joint sitting of the two Houses . Privileges of Parliament
The regulation of the borrowing of money by the Government . The custody of or the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India . The appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India . The declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated fund of India . The receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State . The procedure for passing of Money Bills in Parliament is : @apnaiAMoney Bill can not be introduced in the Rajya Sabha .
> The privileges of each House can be divided into two groups :
Those which are enjoyed by the members individually . Those which belong to each House of Parliament , as a collective body . The privileges enjoyed by the members individually are : Freedom from Arrest exempts a member from arrest during the continuance of a meeting of the House or Committee thereof of which he is a member and during a period of 40 days before and after such meeting or sitting .
This immunity is confined to arrest in civil cases and not in criminal cases or under the law of Preventive Detention . A member cannot be summoned , without the leave of the House to give evidence as a witness while Parliament is in session . There is Freedom of Speech within the walls of each House . The limitation on freedom of speech is that no discussion can take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a motion for removal of the judge .. Ref . Art . 121 ] > The privileges of the House collectively are : The right to publish debates and proceedings and to restrain publication by others . The right to exclude others . " The right to regulate internal affairs of the House . The right to publish Parliamentary misbehaviour . * The right to punish members and outsiders for breach of its privileges . The Legislative Procedures in Parliament > The different stages in the legislative procedure in Parliament relating to Bills other than Money Bills are as follows :
* After a Money Bill has been passed by the Lok Sabha , it is transmitted to the Rajya Sabha ( with the Speaker's certificate that it is a Money Bill ) .
The Rajya Sabha can neither reject a Money Bill nor amend it . It must , within a period of fourteen days . ' from the date of receipt of the Bill , return the Bill to the Lok Sabha with its recommendations . Lok Sabha may accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Rajya Sabha . :
* .
It is upto the Lok Sabha to accept or reject the recomm- endations of the Rajya Sabha . If the Lok Sabha accepts any of the recommendations the Money Bill is deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendment recommended by the Rajya Sabha and accepted by the Lok Sabha . If a Money Bill is not returned by the Rajya Sabha within fourteen days , it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Lok Sabha . [ Ref .: Art . 109 ] Only those Financial Bills are Money Bills which bear the certificate of the Speaker as such .
Financial Bills which do not receive the Speaker's certificate are of two classes . [ Art . 117 ] ( a ) A Bill which contains any of the matters specified in Art . 110 but does not consist solely of those matters . It can be . introduced in Lok Sabha only on the recommendation of President . Rajya Sabha can amend or reject such Bills . ( b ) Any Ordinary Bill which contains provisions involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund .
Introduction of a Bill in either House of Parlianient . Motions after introduction :
3. Report by Select Committee Passing of the Bill in the House where it was introduced .
1 .
Ref .: Art . 117 ( 3 ) ] .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

11. Nagaland …
A **
11 Sikkim
Estimates of expenditure . * Ways and means to raise the revenue .
Tripura
@apna_kir
Odisha ( Orissa ) : 10
Arunachal Pradesh
* An analysis of the actual receipts and expenditures of the closing year and the causes of any surplus or deficit in relation to such year .... An explanation of the economic policy and spending programme of the Government in the coming year and the prospects of revenue . Estimates relating to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India are not put to vote of Parliament but each House can discuss any of these estimates .... Estimates of other expenditure are submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Lok Sabha and it has the power to assent , or to refuse to assent to any demand , No demand for a grant can be made except on the recommendation of the President . [ Ref . : Art . 113 ] The scrutiny of budget proposals is done by the Parliament's Committee on Estimates in order to : Report to the House about the effect on economy , im- provements in organisation , administrative reform etc. Suggest alternative policies ... Examine whether the money is well laid out . Suggest the form in which estimates are to be presented to Parliament . The report of the Estimates Committee is not debated in the House : The Comptroller and Auditor General is the guardian of the public purse and it is his function to see that not a paisa is spent without the authority of Parliament .
Kerala
9 Mizoram 7 Meghalaya
Assam
Punjab
Delhi :
Telangana Jharkhand
6 Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh
_State , Uttar Pradesh Maharashtra . West Bengal
No. State / UT No.
80 Uttarakhand 48 Himachal Pradesh 42 Tripura 40 Manipur 39 Meghalaya 29 : Goa
Bihar
Tamil Nadu _____ Madhya Pradesh Karnataka Gujarat Rajasthan Andhra Pradesh Odisha Kerala y
28 Arunachal Pradesh 26 : Nagaland : 25 Sikkim
25 Mizoram
20 Delhi
17 Puducherry 14 Chandigarh 14 Lakshadweep 13 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 11 and Daman & Diu ( 1 + 1 ) 10 Andaman & Nicobar
Telangana Jharkhand
Assam Punjab Chhattisgarh Haryana
Jammu & Kashmirand Ladakh 6
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

28. Parliamentary Terms
Vote on Account : As there is usually a gap between the presentation of the Budget and its approval , the vote on account enables the Government to draw some amount from the Consolidated Fund of India to meet the expenses in the intervening period .
Question Hour : The day's business normally begins with the Question Hour during which questions asked by the members are answered by the Ministers . The different types of question are :
Guillotine On the last of the allotted days at the appointed time the Speaker puts every question necessary to dispose of all the outstanding matters in connection with demands for grants . This is known as guillotine . The guillotine concludes the discussion on demands for grants . Quorum : It is the minimum number of members whose présence is essential to transact the business of the House . Article 100 provides that the quorum of either House shall be one - tenth of the total number of members of the House . No - Confidence Motion : According to the Constitution , the Council of Ministers stays in office only so long as it enjoys the confidence of the Lok Sabha ; once the confidence is withdrawn the Government is bound to resign . The rules of parliamentary procedure accordingly provide for moving a motion to ascertain this confidence . The motion is generally known as the ' no - confidence motion ' . Censure Motion : A censure , motion differs from a no - confidence motion in that the latter does not specify . any ground on which it is based , while the former has to mention the charges against the Government for which it is being moved . A censure motion can be moved against the Council of Ministers or against an individual Minister for failing to act or for some policy . Reasons for the censure . must be precisely enumerated . The Speaker decides whether or not the motion is in order ; and no leave of the House is
Starred Question is one for which an oral answer is required to be given by the Minister on the floor of the House . Supplementary decides if a question should be answered orally or otherwise . One member can ask only one starred question in a day . Unstarred Question is one for which the Minister lays on the table a written answer . A 10 - day notice has to : be given to ask such questions and no supplementary questions can be asked with regard to such questions . Short Notice Question is one for which can be asked by members on matters of public importance of an urgent nature . It is for the Speaker to decide whether the matter is of urgent nature or not . The member has also to State * reasons for asking the question while serving notice . Zero Hour : This period follows the Question Hour and it generally begins at noon . Usually the time used by the members to raise various issues for discussion . Cut Motion : A motion that seeks reduction in the amount of a demand presented by the Government is known as a cut motion . ' Cut Motion ' can be introduced after the presentation of the Railway and General Budget . Such motions are admitted at the Speaker's discretion . It is a device ' through which members ( generally of the Opposition ) can draw the attention of the Government to a specific grievance . or problem . There are three types of cut motions :
1 .
2 .
3 .
apna
required for moving it .
Disapproval of policy cut which is to express disapproval of the policy underlying a particular demand , says that ' the amount of the demand be reduced by Re . 1 ' . Economy cut asks for a reduction of the amount of the demand by a specific amount . The aim is to affect economy in the expenditure .
1 .
Lame - duck Session : Session held when a new parliament has been elected but the old parliament meets for the last time before it is dissolved . The lame - ducks are the members of the parliament who have not got re - elected . Shadow Cabinet : A Parliament practice prevalent in the UK where senior members of the Opposition cover the areas of responsibility of the actual cabinet . They will form the cabinet if their party is elected to the government . Leader of the Opposition Government has given statutory recognition to the leaders of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha .. .Necessary legislation to this effect was passed by parliament in 1977 and the Rules framed thereunder were brought into effect on November 1 , 1977 . For the first time Y.B. Chavan of the Congress ( I ) was given the official status of Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha with the rank of a Cabinet Minister . The Funds ➤ All money received by or on behalf of the Government of India is credited to either the Consolidated Fund of India , or the Public Accounts of India . The Consolidated Fund of India consists of : All revenues received by the Government of Ind , All loans raised by the Government of India . All money received by Government in repayment of loans . [ Ref .: Art 266 ( 1 ) ] All other public money received by or on behalf of the Government of India is credited to the Public Accounts order raised by then Telegram @ana_channels
Token cut is a device to ventilate specific grievances within the sphere of the Government's responsibility . The grievance has to be specified . Usually the motion in the form , " the amount of the demand be reduced by Rs . 100 " . Adjournment Motion : It is a motion to adjourn the proceedings of the House so as to take up for discussion ¨ some matter of urgent public importance . Any member can move the motion and , if more than fifty members support the demand , the Speaker grants permission for the motion . The notice for such a motion has to be given before the commencement of the sitting on the day . Calling Attention Motion : A member may , with prior permission of the Speaker , call the attention of a Minister to any matter of urgent public interest or ask for time to make a Statement . Privilege Motion : It is a motion moved by a member if he feels that a Minister has committed a breach of privilege of the House or of any one or more of its members by withholding facts of a case or by giving a distorted version of acts . Point of Order ; A member may raise a point of order . if the proceedings of the House do not follow the normal : ” . rules . The presiding officer decides whether the point of
3 .

29. The Supreme Court Article 124 of the Constitution has the provision of establishment and constitution of Supreme Court . From 1949 appeals to the Privy Council where abolished
On being removed by the President . ' The only grounds for such removal are proved misbehaviour and incapacity . [ Ref .: Art . 124 ( 4 ) ] Procedure for removal or impeachment of a Supreme .
all together and the entire appellate jurisdiction apna_kiranCourt Judge :
vested in the first round court .. On January 26 , 1950 , Federal court gave way to the Supreme Court of India under the new Constitution . Article 130 of the Constitution stipulates that " the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other places or place as the Chief Justice of India may , with the approval of the President , form time to time , appoint . " . After its inauguration on January 28 , 1950 , the apex . court commenced its sitting in a part of the Parliament House . The court moved into the present building at Tilak Marg on August 4 , 1958 . The original Constitution of 1950 envisaged a Supreme Court with the Chief Justice and 7 puisne Judges Cleaving it to Parliament to increase this number . As the work of the court increased and arrears of cases began to cumulate , Parliament increase the number of judges from 7 in 1950 to 10 in 1956,13 in 1960 , 17 in 1977 , 25 in 1986 , 30 in 2009 and 33 in 2019 .
A motion addressed to the President signed by at least . 100 members of the Lok Sabha or 50. members of the Rajya Sabha is delivered to the Speaker or the Chairman . The motion is investigated by a Committee of 3 ( 2Judges of the Supreme Court and a distinguished Jurist ) . If the Committee finds the Judge guilty , report of Committee is considered in the House where the Motion is pending . If the motion is passed in each House by majority of the total membership of the House and by a majority of not less than two - thirds of the members present and voting the address is presented to the President .. The Judge is removed after the President gives his order for removal on such address . The procedure for impeachment is the same for Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts . After retirement a Judge of the Supreme Court . can not plead or act in any Court or before any authority within the territory of India . [ Ref . : Art . 124 ( 7 ) ] Office of CJI Under ambit of RTI The Supreme Cour on November 13 , 2019 , held that the office of the Chief Justice of India is a public authority and fall within the ambit of the Right to Information Act . CII - Justice Ranjan Gog Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is three - fold
1. Original ;
2. Appellate ; and
3. Advisory . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Number of SC Judges
President Ram Nath Kovind on August 9 , 2019 signed into law a Bill which seeks to increase the sanctioned strength of judges in the Supreme Court from 30 to 33 besides the Chief Justice of India , The Supreme Court ( Number of Judges ) Amendment Bill was passed by Parliament earlier in August , 2019 . The present strength of the apex court is 33 , including the Chief Justice of India , After the law came into force , the sanctioned strength of SC is 34 , including the CJI .

3. CJ & Judges
Salag ( + 1,01 - J1-2016 ) : Allowance
.09.2017
1 Chief Justice of @ 2,80,000 / - per @ 45,000 / - per India
month
month
Judges of the 2,50,000 / - per @ ₹ 34,000 / - per
month
Supreme Court month
3. Chief Justice of High Courts
4. Judges of the
250,000 / - per 34.000 / -pe
Fr month
month
@ 225,000 / - per 27,000 / - per
High Courts
month
month
[ Source Govt of India , Department of Justice )

30. The High Court .
The High Court is the head of the Judiciary in the State . > There are 24 High Courts in the country , three having . jurisdiction over more than one state . Six High Courts ( Allahabad , Bombay , Gauhati , Madhya Pradesh , Madras and Rajasthan ) have 11 Permanent Benches amongst themselves . > Only Karnataka High Court has two circuit Benches at Dharwad and Gulbarga . Among the union territories , Delhi - alone has a High Court of its own . Other six union territories.come under the jurisdiction of different state : High Courts . Every Judge of a High Court is appointed by the President .
Ayodhya Dispute Resolved . The Supreme Court ruled on November 9 , 2019 in favour of a Ram temple on a disputed 2.77 acre plot in Ayodhya . The order passed by a five - judge Constitution bench headed by Chief Justice of India ( CJI ) Ranjan Gogoi .
The court's ruling comes 136 years after the first caseapna_kiran in the Ram Janmabhoomi - Babri Masjid issue was filed , and nine years after the Allahabad High Court delivered a judgement that each of the three main parties , the Sunni Waqf Board , the Nirmohi Akhara and Ram Lalla Virajman get an equal portion of the disputed land measuring 2.77 acres . The foundation stone of Ram temple was led by the P.M. at Ram Janmbhoomi in Ayodhya on 5th August , 2020 . Triple Talaq Bill Passed by Parliament The Muslim Women ( Protection of Rights on Marriage ) Bill , 2019 also known as Triple Talaq Bill was passed by Parliament on July 30 , 2019. The Lok Sabha passed it earlier with a majority of 303 with 82 voting against . The Rajya Sabha passed it with a majority of 99 votes with 84 voting against on July 30 , 2019 . The Bill make all declaration of talaq , including in written or electronic form , to be avoid ( ie , not enforceable in law ) and illegal . It defines talaq as talaq : e - biddat or any other similar form of talaq pronounced by a Muslim man resulting in instant and irrevocable divorce . Talaq - e - biddat refers to the practice under Muslim personal laws where pronouncement of the word ' talaq ' thrice in one sitting by a Muslim man to his wife results in an instant and irrevocable divorce . The Bill makes déclaration of talaqa cognizable offence . President Ram Nath Kovind gave his nod to the Muslim Women ( Protection of Rights on Marriage ) Bill , 2019 on July 31 , 2019. The law comes into force
> In making appointment as a High Court Judge . President can consult the Chief Justice of India , the Governor of the State and also the Chief Justice of that High Court . The Judge of the High Courts in India is administered oath of office by the Governor of the State or some person appointed by him for the purpose . > A Judge of the High Court can hold office until the age of 62 years ..
A High Court Judge can leave his office :.
By resignation in writing addressed to the President . By being appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court or being transferred to any other High Court by the President . * By removal by the President , The mode of removal of a Judge of the High Court is same as that of a Judge of the Supreme Court .. The qualifications for being a Judge of the High Court are : Be a citizen of India .. * Not above 62 years of age . * Must have held for at least 10 years a judicial office in territory of India or experience of at least 10 years as advocate of a High Court , or of two or more such courts in succession in India . Salaries and allowances of the High Court Judges are charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State .
[ Art : 202 ( 3 ) ( d ) ] .
After retirement a permanent Judge of High Court can not plead or act in a Court or before any authority in India , except the Supreme Court and a High Court in which he has not workedis retrospectively join on Telegram @apna_channels

23.03.2013 Tripura
Tripura
iran
152
Before the bifurcation of Telangana as a separate state the principal seat of Andhra Pradesh was at Hyderabad which was established In 1954 ,
The oldest High Court in India .
This has at present 61 subjects ( originally 66 subjects ) like public service , public order , Police , Public health and sanitation , Agriculture , irrigation , prisons , local government , fisheries , markets , theaters , gambling , land revenue and so on . Concurrent List : Both the Parliament and State . Legislature can make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List . This list : has at present 52 subjects ( originally 47 subjects ) like national waterways , criminal law and procedure , civil procedure , marriage and divorce , population control and family planning , electricity , labour welfare , economic and social planning , drugs , newspapers . books and printing press , factories and others . Note : The42 Amendment Actof1976 transferred5subjects to Concurrent List from State List

31. Centre - State Relations Centre - state relationship in India is looking towards federalism , whichhasbeenderived from the Constitution of Canada . The Constitution of India , being federal in structure , divides all powers ( legislative , executive and financial ) between the centre and the states . However , there is no division of judicial power as the Constitution has established an integrated judicial system to enforce both the Central laws as well as State laws . The constitution provides for a three - fold distribution of legislative subjects between the centre and the states , viz . List - I ( the Union List ) , List - II ( The State List ) and List - II ! ( The Concurrent List ) in the 7th Schedule . Union List The Parliament has exclusive powers to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List . This list has at present 100 subjects ( originally 97 subjects ) like defense , banking , foreign affairs , currency , atomic energy , insurance , communication , inter - state trade and commerce , census , audit , postal services , rail , air and water transport , Broadcasting , foreign debt , foreign trade and so on .. State List The state legislature has " in normal circumstances exclusive powers to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List .
education
( b ) forests , ( c ) weights and measures ; ( 1 ) protection of wild animals and birds and ( e ) administration o justice ; constitution and organisation of all cour except the Supreme Court and the High Courts Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India not included in a state though that matter is one which is enumerated in the State List . This provision has reference to the Union Territories or the Acquired Territories ( if any ) Join on Telegram @apna_channels

32. Executive of the States The Governor ( Art . 153-163 ]
The Governor of a state is appointed by the President and holds his office at the pleasure of the President . [ Art . 156 ] Qualifications for the post of Governor are ( Art . 157 ] : Should be a citizen of India . Should be over 35 years of age . Must not hold other office of profit and should not be a Member of the Legislature of the Union or of any State [ R : Art . 158 ]
Appointment of Governor
The appointment of a Governor in a State is made as per Article . 155 of the Constitution

4.00.000
Governor
3,50,000
Chief Justice of Supreme
280,000
Other Judges of Supreme Court

2.50,000
Governor cannot promulgate Ordinances without instructions from the President if : * A Bill containing the same provisions would require previous sanction of the President . Bill is required to be reserved for consideration of the President . Privileges of State Legislature Privileges of State Legislature are similar to those of
1. Union Parliament . Each House of the State Legislature can punish for breach of its privileges or for contempt . Each House is the sole judge of the question whether any of its privileges has been infringed . Court has no jurisdiction to interfere with the decision of the House on this point .. No House of the Legislature can create any new privilege for itself , Court can determine whether the House possesses a particular privilege . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Chief Justice of High Courts
1000
Other Judges of High court
$ 225,000
Comptroller and Auditor General of Indi

2.50,000
Chief Election Commissioner
2,50,000 2.50,000
Attorney General of India
The Legislative Council is not dissolved . One - third of the members of Legislative Council retire on the expiry of every second year . [ Ref .: Art . 172 ( 2 ) ] A Legislative Assembly has its Speaker and Deputy Speaker and a Legislative Council has its Chairman and Deputy Chairman , and the provisions relating to them- are analogous to those relating to the corresponding officers of the Union Parliament . Qualifications for membership of State Legislature are : Should be a citizen of India ; For Legislative Assembly , not less than twenty - five years of age and for Legislative Council not less than thirty years of age ;

33. Panchayati Raj
Out of the reserved seats , 1/3 is reserved for women : belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes . 1/3 of the total seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat , is reserved for women . A State can make similar reservation for Chairpersons in the Panchayats :
The term ' Panchayati Raj ' in India signifies the system of rural self - government . The subject of ' Local Government ' is mentioned in the State List under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution . Panchayati Raj institutions are primarily the institution of self - government . According to the 73rd constitutional amendment act the minimum age for contesting elections to the Panchayati Raj institutions should be 21 years . Panchayati Raj was constitutionalised through the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992 . This bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 22 December , 1992 and by the Rajya Sabha on 23 December , 1992. Later it was approved by the 17 state assemblies and received the assent of the President on April 23 , 1993 . This Act has become effective w.e.f. 24 April , 1993 . 24 April is observed as ' Panchayati raj Diwas ' since 2010. ( First time by P.M. Dr. Manmohan Singh . ) : This act has added a new Part - IX to the Constitution . This part is entitled as ' The Panchayats ' . It consists of provisions from Articles 243 to 243 O. This act has also added a new Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution . This Schedule contains 29 functional items of the panchayats . It deals with Article 243 - G . Part IX of the Constitution envisages a three tier system of Panchayats : * Panchayat at the village level ; The District Panchayat at the district level ;
the
Every Panchayat can continue for 5 years from the date of its first meeting It can be dissolved earlier in accordance with State law . A Panchayat reconstituted after premature dissolution , continues only for the remainder of the period . But if the remainder of the period is less than 6 months it is not necessary to hold elections . > . All persons above 21 years of age and qualified to be a member of the State Legislature are qualified as a member of a Panchayat . [ Art . 243F ) Panchayats can be entrusted to prepare and implement plans for economic development and social justice . A State can authorise a Panchayat to levy , collect and appropriate taxes , duties , tolls etc ..
After the 73 Amendment of the Constitution ( 24 April , 1993 ) , every 5 years the States appoint a Finance Commission to review the financial position : of the Panchayats and make recommendations . State Election Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner is appointed by the Governor for superintendence , direction and control of elections to Panchayats . ( Art . 243K ] .
The Community Development Programme was inched on Oct. 2 , 1952 . The Democratic Decentralisation was implemented for the first time in 1958 in some areas of Andhra Pradesh ¨on experimental basis . > The Panchayati Raj was introduced for the first time on Oct. 2 , 1959 in Nagaur District of Rajasthan by the Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru . Rajasthan is the first state in India , where Panchayati . Raj was implemented in the whole state . Rajasthan was followed by Andhra Pradesh , which also adopted the system in 1959 . The Report of L.M. Singhvi Committee on Revitalization of Panchayati Raj Institutions , Government of India , 1986 , focuses on integrated vision of democracy , ascent and ennui of Panchayati Raj momentum . The Committee takes the Indian villages and the Gram Sabha as the republican base of our democratic nation . It considers the Gram Sabha as the embodiment of direct democracy . It has recommendations on Nyaya Panchayats and integrated administrative structures . A Sub - committee of the consultative committee of Parliament was constituted in 1988 under the chairmanship of P.K. Thungon , which made recommendation for the first time that the Panchayati Raj bodies should be constitutionally recognised . But the recommendations of the Gadgil Committee , constituted in 1988 under the chairmanship of V.N. Gadgil , became the basis for drafting an amendment bill aimed at conferring the constitutional status and protection to the Panchayati Raj institutions . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
* The Intermediate Panchayat in States where the population is above 20 lakhs .
• '
All the seats in a Panchayat is filled by direct election . The electorate is named ' Gram Sabha ' . Gram Sabha is a village assembly consisting of all the ..registered voters in the area of a panchayat . ; ➤ The members of panchayats at the village , intermediate and district levels shall be elected directly by the people . The chairperson of panchayats at the intermediate and district levels ( Zila Parishad ) shall be elected indirectly by and from amongst the elected members thereof . ' Sarpanch ' presides over the meeting of Gram Sabha even in Schedule Areas . The Chairperson of a Panchayat at village level is elected according to the law passed by a State . Seats are reserved in Panchayat for Scheduled Castes , and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population . . [ Art . 243D ] PESA Act of 1996 ( Extension Act ) The provisions of Part IX of the constitution relating to the Panchayats are not applicable to the Fifth Schedule areas . However , the Parliament may extend these provisions to such areas . Under this provision , the Parliament has enacted the " Provisions of the Panchayats ( Extension to the Scheduled Areas ) Act " , 1996 , popularly known as the PESA Act or the Extension Act . Ten states - Andhra Pradesh , Chhattisgarh , Gujarat , Himachal Pradesh , Jharkhand , Madhya Pradesh , Maharashtra , Odisha , Rajasthan and Telangana have Fifth Schedule Areas ( till 2016 ) .

37. NITI Aayog
On the 1 % January 2015 , by resolution the Government of India constituted a ' NITI Aayog ' ( NITI stands for National Institution for Transforming India ) The Prime Minister of India is the chairperson and Chief Ministers of all the States and Lt. Governor of Andaman & Nicobar Islands ( UT ) are the members of NITI Aayog's Governing Council . The Aayog will have five full - time members , two . permanent members , four Union Ministers as ex - officio . members and three Union Ministers as special invitees . Arvind Pangariya ( An Indo - US economist and ex - chief Economist of Asian Development Bank ) was the first Vice Chairman of the NITI Aayog The first meeting of the newly constituted planning body , the NITI Aayog was chaired by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 5 February , 2015 . 38. National Development Council ( NDC ) The National Development Council was formed in 1952 , to associate the States in the formulation of the Plans . All members of the Union Cabinet , Chief Ministers of ' States , the Administrators of the Union Territories and member of the erstwhile Planning Commission ( now NITI Aayog ) are members and the Prime Minister of India is the Chairman of the NDC . > Functions of the NDC are : * Review working of national plan . @apnaxkir Recommend measures to meet targets of national plan .
2 .

3. The Western Zone ( HQ : Mumbai ) : Gujarat , Maharashtra , Goaand the Union Territory of Dadra & Nagar Haveliand Daman & Diu .
The Southern Zone ( HQ : Chennai ) : Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Tamil Nadu , Kerala , Telangana and the Union Territory of Puducherry . The Eastern Zone ( HQ : Kolkata ) : Bihar , Jharkhand , West Bengal and Odisha . The North Eastern States : Assam , Arunachal Pradesh , Manipur , Tripura , Mizoram , Meghalaya and Nagaland are not included in the Zonal Councils and their special problems are looked after by the North Eastern Council , set up under the North Eastern Council Act , 1972. It came into existence on August 8 , 1972. Later on Sikkim has been included in it on 23rd Dec , 2002 .
4 .
5 .
Each Zonal Council consists of the Chief Minister and two other Ministers of each of the States in the Zone and the Administrator in the case of a Union Territory . The Union Home Minister has been nominated to be the common chairman of all the Zonal Councils . 36. Planning Commission Planning Commission was not mentioned in the Constitution . Planning Commission was an economic advisory body : set up by a resolution of the Union Cabinet on 15th March , 1950 . Pt . Jawahar Lal Nehru was the first and Narendra Modi is the last chairman of Planning Commission ➤ Gulzari Lal Nanda was the Deputy Chairman of the 1st Planning Commission : The Planning Commission consisted of the Chairman , four Ministers as part time members and seven full - time members . Prime Minister had been the Chairman of Planning Commission .
It is an extra constitutional and extra legal body . 39. National Integration Council > National Integration Council was set - up in 1986 , to deal with welfare measures for the minorities on an All - India basis . It includes Union Ministers , Chief Ministers of State , representatives of National and Regional political _ parties , labour , women , public figures and media representatives . NDC is a non - constitutional body . 40. Finance Commission The Constitution provides for the establishment of a Finance Commission ( Art . 270 , 273 , 275 and 280 ) . by the President . The first Finance Commission was constituted in 1951 . Finance Commissions of India Report Implementation Year :
S1 . Constituted
Chairman

1.1951
2. 1956
K.
C. Niyogi
1952–1957
K. Santhanam
1957-1962
13 , 1960
AK Chanda
1962-1966
Main functions of the Planning Commission were : To prepare an integrated Five Year Plan for the most effective and balanced utilisation of the country's resources for economic and social development . To act as an advisory body to the Union Government and State Governments ...
Dr. P. V. Rajamannar
* 4 . 1961
1966-1969
Máhavir Tyagi

5.1968
1969-1974
61972
1974-1979
Brahmanand Red
J. M. Schelet
7 : 1977
1979-1984
Y
B. Chavan
81982
1984-1989
N.KP Salve
91987
1989-1995
On 15th August , 2014 the Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced that a new institution would be formed in
KC Pant
10 , 1992
1995-2000
111998
AM Khus
2000-2005
place of the Play Telegram @apna_channels
miniss

42. Election :
Name ,
Tehure
The general election is held on the basis of adult . suffrage . Every person who is a citizen of India and not less than 18 years of age is entitled to vote at the election , provided he is not disqualified by law . Election to Parliament or the Legislature of a State can be called in question only by an election petition in the High Court , with appeal to the Supreme Court . ( Art . 329 ] The exclusive forum for adjudicating disputes relating to the election of the President and Vice - president is the Supreme Court . [ Art . 71 ]
14 June , 2001-07 Feb. , 2004 08 Feb , 2001-15 May , 2005 16 May , 2005-29 June , 2006 30 June , 2006-20 April , 2009 . 21 April , 2009-29 July , 2010 30 July , 2010-10 June , 2012 11 June , 2012–15 January , 2015 , 16 January 2015-18 April , 2015 * 19 April , 2015-05 July , 2017 ( 06 July , 2017-22 January , 2018 . 23 January , 2018-01 Dec. 2018 02 December , 2018-12 April , 2021 13 April , 2021-14 May , 2022 15 May , 2022-18 February , 2025 19 Feb. 2025-

12. J. M. Lyngdoh 13. T. S. Krishna Murthy 14.
B. B. Tandon 15. N. Gopalaswami . 16. Naveen B , Chawla 17. Dr. S. Y. Quraishi 18. V.S.Sampath . 19. H. S. Brahma 20. Dr. Nascem Zaidi 21. Achal Kumar Joti 22 Om Prakash Rawat 23. Sunil Arora 21. Sushil Chandra 25. Rajiv Kumar 26. Gyanesh Kumar
Election Commission
> Inordertosupervise the entire procedure and machinery for election and for some other ancillary matters , the Constitution provides for this independent body .
( source eci.gov.in ]
[ Art . 324 ] .
1 female Chief Election Commissioner
The Election Commission is independent of executive control to ensure a fair election . The Election Commission consists of a Chief Election Commissioner and two other Election Commissioners . > President can determine the number of Election Commissioners . [ Art . 324 ( 2 ) ] . Chief Election Commissioner ( CEC ) > The President appoints the Chief Election Commissioner who has a tenure of 6 years , or up to the age of 65 years , whichever is earlier .
The main functions of the Election Commission are :
1. The preparation of electoral rolls before each general election and registration of all eligible voters .
2. The delimitation of constituencies .
The recognition of various political parties and allot- ment of election symbol to these parties . According to the ' Press Note ' released by the Election Commission of India on 2nd Dec. , 2000 the Election Symbols ( Reservation and Allotment ) Order , 1968 was promulgated by the Election Commission on 31st Au- gust , 1968 , in exercise of its powers under Article 324 of
3 .
The CEC enjoys the same status and receives the samepna_kirathe Constitution and Rules 5 and 10 of the Conduct of
salary and perks as available to judges of the Supreme Court . The Chief Election Commissioner can be removed from his office only in a manner and on the grounds ☐ prescribed for removal of judge of the Supreme Court . Other Election Commissioners can be removed by the President on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner . The Election Commission has the power of superin- tendence , direction and conduct of all elections to Parliament and the State Legislatures and of elections to . the offices of the President and Vice - President .
Elections Rules , 1961. The Order , initially , made provi- sions , both for the registration of political parties and also for their recognition as National and State parties , and also for the specification and allotment of election symbols to contesting candidates . * The Commission has decided that henceforth a political party shall be eligible to be recognised as a National party if_ ( i ) it secures at least six percent ( 6 % ) of the valid votes polled in any four or more states ; at a general election : to the House of the People or , to the State Legislative Assembly and ( ii ) in addition , it wins at least four seats in the House of : the People from any State or States . Or , it wins at least two percent ( 2 % ) seats in the House of the People ( ie . , 11 seats in the existing House having 543 members ) , and these members are elected from at least three different States . * A political party shall be entitled to be recognised as a State party , if- ( i ) it secures at least six percent ( 6 % ) of the valid votes polled in the State at a general election , either to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned ; and ( i ) in addition , it wins at least two seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned . Or , it wins at least three percent ( 3 % ) of the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State , or at least three seats in the Assembly , whichever is more .
4. The preparation of a code of conduct for the political parties . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
[ Ref .: Art . 324 ( 1 ) ]
Regional Commissioners can be appointed by the President in consultation with the Election Commission for assisting the Election Commission . [ Ref .: Art . 324 ( 4 ) ] Chief Election Commissioners of India Name
Tenure

1. Sukumar Sen
21 March , 1950–19 Dec. , 1958
K. V. K - Sundaram
20 Dec. , 1958-30 Sept. , 1967
S. P. Sen Verma
01 Oct. , 1967-30 Sept. , 1972 .
Dr. Nagendra Singh
01 Oct. , 1972-06 Feb. , 1973-
07 Feb. , 1973-17 June , 1977
T. Swaminathan
5 .
18 June , 1977-17 June , 1982 18 June , 1982-31 Dec. , 1985 . 01 Jan. , 1986–25 Nov. 1990 26 Nov. , 1990-11 Dec. , 1990 . 12 Dec. 1990-11 Dec. , 1996 12 Dec. , 1996-13 June , 2001

6. S. L. Shakdhar
R. K. Trivedi
R. V. S. Peri Shastri
Smt . V. S. Rama Devi *

10. T. N. Seshan Ge 11 Dr. M. S. Gill

44. The Official Languages .. The Official language of the Union is Hindi in Devanagri script [ Art . 343 ] . English was to continue to be used as principal official language of the Union side - by - side with Hindi till 1965 . The first Official Language Commission was

45. National Symbols
National Flag
- The National flag is a horizontal tricolour of deep appointedJoin on Telegram @apn channels in the middle and

1. Politics
Aristotle :
-Montesquieu
2 Philosophy of Rights
Hegel
Ben
" All the powers of government , legislative , executive and judiciary , result to the legislative body . The concentration of these in the same hands is precisely the definition of despotic government . It will be no alleviation that these powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands and not by a single one . One hundred and seventy three despots would surely be as oppressive as one . "

3. Political Science and Government
4. Ethical Studies 5. Metaphysical Theory of the State .
Dr. Garner
F.H. Bradley Dr. L.T. Hobhouse

6. The Origin of the Family , Private Property Frederick Engels and the State

7. Theory of the State 18. Elements of Political Scien 9 Principles of Political Science 10 Representative Government 11 ) Arthshastra 12 : Grammar of Politics apna_kiEncyclopedia of Social Science
Bluntschli Leacock Prof. R.N. Gilchrist John Stuart Mill Kautilya Harold Laski Richard W. Flournoy Cicero GoodRousseau : Maclver : C.D. Burnsti
-Jefferson
47 : Some Important Statements Father of Science of politics in west
-Aristotle
" Man is by nature a political animal and he who by nature and not by mere accident is without state , is either above humanity or below it . " -Aristotle " State came into existence for the sake of mere life but now it continues to exist for the sake of good life . "

14. De Republica 15 : Social Contract 16. The Modern State 17 , Democracy
-Aristotle

18. Metaphysical First Principles of Theory of Immanuel Kant Law ( 1796 ) bond . 1795
" Human consiousness postulates liberty ; liberty involves rights ; rights demand the state . " -Prof . Barker " Father of the Idealistic Theory " . -Immanuel Kant " State is a march of God upon earth . "
19 , Modem Democracies 20 : Political Science 21 Dictatorship 22. Spirit of the Laws
Bryce SESS Gettell
Alfred Cobbon Montesquieu
-Hegel
" Though the king is a human being yet no one should hate him because he is God in the shape of man . "

23. Social Statics and Man Versus the State ( 1903 ) Herbert Spencer 24. Principles of Morals and Legislation 25. Introduction to Modern Political Theory 26. Gandhi and Gandhism
Bentham C.E.M. Joad Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya Karl Marx
-Manusmriti .
" People were fedup with the anarchy and so God created the state for their protection . " -Manusmriti 48. Some Important Definitions According to Paul Janet , " Political Science is the part of social science which treats of the foundations of the State and the principles of Government . " Bluntschli believes that " Political Science is a science , which is concerned with the State endeavours to understand and comprehend the State , in its essential nature , various forms , manifestations and developments . "
27 : Das Capital

50. Miscellaneous
> Sir William Ivor Jennings said that " The Directive Principles of the state policy are the only pious aspiration of the noble souls " .
Uniform Civil Code , Uttarakhand 2024 On 11th March , 2024 ; The President gave her assent to the Uniform Civil Code , Uttarakhand , 2024 under Article 201 of the Constitution of India . With this Uttarakhand is the firs ! state in the country after Independence to adopt the UCC Uniform Civil Code is a legal framework aimed at replacing personal laws based on religions and traditions , with one common law enforced for everyone regardless of the religion cast and gender . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Garris , famous German author is of the opinion that " Political Science deals with the origin , development , purpose and all political problems of the State . " Gettell says , " It is , thus , a study in the past , present and future ; of political organisations and political theories . "

1..Highlights of Indian Economy According to the Press Note released by the National Statistical Office ( NSOjon 28 February , 2025 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation ( MOSPT ) the Second Advance Estimates ( SAE ) of National Income , 2024-25 ; Quarterly Estimates ( QE ) of Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) for October - December quarter ( Q3 ) of 2024-25 and First Revised and Final Estimates of Gross Domestic Product , National Income , Consumption Expenditure , Saving and Capital Formation for 2023-24 22022-23 respectively , Second Advance Estimates ( October December ) Of 2024-25 These estimates are released both at Constant ( 2011-12 ) and Current Prices , in accordance with the release calendar of National Accounts .
Annual Estimates and Growth Rate Real GDP or GDP at Constant Prices is estimated ta attain a level of ₹ 187.95 lakh crore in the financial yer 2024-25 , against the First Revised Estimate of GDP for the year 2023-24 of 176.51 lakh crore . The grow rate in Real GDP during 2024-25 is estimated at 6.5 % , as compared to 9.2 % in 2023-24 . Nominal GDP or GD ? at Current Prices is estimated to attain a level of 331 lakh crore in the year 2024-25 , against 301.23 lakh crore in 2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 9.9 % . Real GVA is estimated at 171.80 lakh crore in the year 2024-25 , against the FRE for the year 2023-24 cá * 161.51 lakh crore , registering a growth rate of 6.4 % as compared to 8.6 % growth rate in 2023-24 . Nominal GVA is estimated to attain a level of 300.15 lakh crore during FY 2024 25 , against ₹ 274.13 lakh crore in 2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 9.5 % . Quarterly Estimates and Growth Rates Real GDP or GDP at Constant Prices in Q3 of FY 2024-25 is estimated at 47.17 lakh crore , against * 44.44 lakh crore in Q3 of FY2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 6.2 % . Nominal GDP or GDP at Current Prices in Q3 of FY 2024-25 is estimated at 84.74 lakh crore , @apna_kiran against ₹ 77.10 lakh crore in Q3 of FY 2023-24 , showing
Key Highlights
Real GDP has been estimated to grow by 6.5 % in FY 2024-25 . Nominal GDP is expected to witness a growth rate of 9.9 % in FY 2024-25 . Both the growth rates are revised upward from their respective First Advance
Estimates .
As per the First Revised Estimates , Real GDP has grown by 9.2 % in the financial year 2023-24 , which is highest in the previous 12 years except for the financial year 2021-22 ( the post - covid year ) . This growth has been contributed by double - digit growth rates in Manufacturing sector ( 123 % ) , ' Construction ' sector ( 10.4 % ) and Financial , Real Estate & Professional Services ' sector ( 10.3 % ) .
a growth rate of 9.9 % .
Real GVA in Q3 of FY 2024-25 is estimated at lakh crore , against 40.60 lakh crore in Q3 of FY 2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 6.2 % . Nominal GVA in Q3 of FY 2024-25 is estimated at 77.06 lakh crore , against 69.90 lakh crore in Q3 of FY 2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 10.2 % . [ Source : NSO MOSPI Report Q3 28.02.2025 ] Industrial growth pushes up Q4 for GDP to 7.4 % . ➤ India's Real Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) gained strength as it picked up pace sequentially to a four- quarter high of 7.4 % in January - March , 2025 on the back of firm industrial growth in manufacturing construction and mining sectors even as consumption demand slowed down . The full - year growth rate , however , is estimated to have slowed to a four - year low of 6.5 % for financial year 2024-25 , the same leve ! as the second advance estimates released February - end , data released by the National Statistics Office ( NSO ) on May 30 , 2025 showed . > GDP had grown 8.4 % in Q4 in 2023-24 and 9.2 % in FY24 . The growth rate for the previous quarter was also revised up , with Q3 growth now estimated at 6.4 % against 6.2 % earlier ,

43.13
As per the Final Estimates , Real GDP has observed a . growth rate of 7.6 % in the financial year 2022-23 , mainly contributed by double - digit growth rates in Trade , Hotels , Transport , Communication & Services related to Broadcasting ' sector ( 12.3 % ) , Financial , Real Estate & Professional Services ' sector ( 10.8 % ) and ' Electricity ,. Gas , Water Supply & Other Utility Services ' sector ( 10.8 % ) . Real GDP is estimated to grow by 6.2 % in Q3 of FY 2024-25 Growth rate in Nominal GDP for Q3 of FY 2024-25 has been estimated at 9.9 % The growth rate of Real GDP for Q2 of financial year 2024-25 has been revised upward to 5.6 % .
Construction ' sector is estimated to observe a growth rate of 8.6 % , followed by ' Financial , Real Estate & Professional Services ' sector : ( 7.2 % ) and Trade , Hotels , Transport , Communication & Services related to Broadcasting ' sector ( 6.4 % ) during 2024-25 . Private Final Consumption Expenditure ( PFCE ) is expected to register a good growth of 7.6 % during 2024-25 as compared to 5.6 % growth observed during 2023-24
Industrial growth picked up pace to 6.8 % in Q4 FY2 from 5.1 % in Q3eventhoughitwasslower than the 10.2 growth seen in Q4 FY24 . Manufacturing growth rose to a three - quarter high of 4.8 % in January - March , whil the construction sector clocked a double - digit grow Join on Telegram @apna channels

2. State Economy
Rooted in the ideas of historical change proposed by the German philosopher Karl Marx ( 1818-1883 ) more specifically , this kind of economic system first came up in the erstwhile USSR after the Bolshevik Revolution ( 1917 ) and got its ideal shape in the People's Republic of China ( 1949 ) . > This form of economic system also spread to other * countries in eastern Europe . Here we see two versions of the state economy - in erstwhile USSR known as the socialist economy and in pre - 1985 China as the communist economy .
Since 2019-20 , manufacturing GVA has registered a slower growth rate ( CAGR of 4.04 % ) than even agriculture and allied activities ( 4.72 % ) . This explains , to some extent , the high urban - in particular , youth unemployment in India . It also provides an understanding of why labour has been moving back to Indian villages , and joining agriculture and allied activities .. [ Source : IE , May 31 , 2025 ]

2. Economy and Economics Economy : It is the state of a country or region in terms of the production and consumption of goods and services and the supply of money . Economics : It is the branch of knowledge concerned with the production , consumption and transfer of wealth . Types of Economy .. Depending upon the dominant view of the time in a particular country , different forms of production patterns evolved and different economic systems finally came up , providing alternative ways of organising an economy . The three models of economic systems which we see coming up are basically the different stages in the evolutionary process for our experiments which define a better way of organising our economy .
While socialistic economy emphasised the collective ownership of the means of production ( property and assets ) and it also ascribed a large role to the state in running the economy , communist economy advocated state ownership of all properties including labour and absolute power to state in running the economy . Though for Marx , Socialism was a transitional stage to communism , it never did happen in reality . ➤ The socialist and communist economies used to criticise capitalistic economics of being based on exploitation . In response , the capitalist economies called them the practioners of ' state capitalism ' , where the states were the sole exploitators .

3. Mixed Economy
The belief in the self - correcting quality of the market and the ' invisible hand ' of Adam Smith got a major setback in early 20th century during the ' Great Depression ( 1929 ) . The impact of the depression spread from the USA to other economies of Western Europe escalating large

1. Capitalistic Economy
> The capitalistic form of economy has its origin in the famous work of Adam Smith - Wealth of Nations ( 1776 ) . Adam Smith ( 1723-1790 ) the Scottish philosopher- economist professor at University of Glasgow whose
writings formed the basis of classical economics hadna_kiran the employment , downfallin demand andeconomic
stressed certain fine ideas which were to take fancy among some of the western countries and finally capitalism took birth . Smith raised his voice against the heavy - handed government regulation of commerce and industry of the time which did not allow the economy to tap its full economic worth and reach the level of well- being . Stressing division of labour , an environment of ' laissez faire ' ( non - interference by the government ) , he proposed that the ' invisible hand ' of ' market forces ' ( price mechanism ) will bring a state of equilibrium in the economy and a general well - being to the countrymen . For such an economy to function for public well - being , " he has acknowledged the need of competition in the ** market . A Once the USA attained Independence the ideas of Adam Smith were made part of its public policy - just one year , after Wealth of Nations was published . From here the idea spread to other parts of Euro - America - by 1800 the economic system called ' capitalism ' was established . which was later known by different names - Private Enterprise System . Free Enterprise System , Market Economy .
activities and lockouts in industrial enterprises . The prevailing Smithonian macro ideas failed to check the crisis . A new approach was needed which came in the famous work . The General Theory of Employment , Interest , and Money ( 1936 ) by the English economist at Cambridge University , John Maynard Keynes ( 1883-1946 ) . - Keynes questioned the very principle of ' laissez - faire ' and the nature of the ' invisible hand ' . He even opined that the invisible hand brings equilibrium to the economy but by ' strangulating the poor ' . He suggested that prices and wages are not flexible enough to provide empolyment to all . Questioning the limitations of the market mechanism , Keynes suggested strong government intervention in the economy . To get the economy out of the depression , he suggested an increase in government expenditures , discretionary fiscal policy ( fiscal deficit , lower interest rates , cheap money supply , etc. ) to boost the demand of goods and services as this was the reason behind the depression . As Keynesian policies were followed , the concerned economies were successfully pulled out of the Great Depression . As a follow up to the Keynesian advices , many trendsetting economic policies were initiated through out the capitalist economies . One very important initiative which came out was the government's active role in the economy : Join on Telegram @apna_channels
י ,
The decisions of what to produce , how much to produce and at what price to sell are taken by the market , by the private enterprises in this system , with the state having no economic role .
As Keynes has suggested that the capitalist economy should move few steps towards socialistic economy , Prof. Lange was suggesting just the same in the case of the state economies .

3. Similarly , the value of the total production of an economy might be measured in currency terms which means the economy is growing .
4. Per capita income for an economy might be measured in monetary terms over a period . We may say that economic growth is a
quantitative
progress .
To calculate the growth rate of an economic variable the difference between the concerned period is converted into percentage form . > Growth rate is an annual concept which may be used . Otherwise with the clear reference to the period for which it is used .
i .
Though growth is a value neutral term , i.e. , it might be positive or negative for an economy for a period , we generally use it in the positive sense . If economists say an economy is growing it means the economy is having a positive growth otherwise they use the term ' negative growth ..
Economic Growth
> The National Statistics Office ( NSO ) , Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation ( MoSPI ) .. released the Quarterly Estimates of Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) for the July - September Quarter ( Q2 ) of the Financial Year ( FY ) 2024-25 . Real GDP has been estimated to grow by 5.4 % in Q2 of FY 2024-25 over the growth rate of 8.1 % in Q2 of FY 2023-24 . Despite sluggish growth observed in manufacturing . and mining and quarrying sectors , real Gross Value @apna_kirAdded ( GVA ) in H1 ( April - September ) has recorded
The Wealth of Nations
Adam Smith Irwin Fisher
Money Illusion
a growth rate of 6.2 % . Real GDP or GDP at Constant Prices in Q2 of 2024-25 is estimated at 44.10 lakh crore , against Rs . 41.86 lakh crore in Q2 of 2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 5.4 % . Nominal GDP or GDP at Current Prices in Q2 of 2024-25 is estimated at 76.60 lakh crore , against € 70.90 lakh crore in Q2 of 2023-24 , showing a growth rate of 8.0 % . [ Source : BHARAT 2025 ]
Capital and Growth
Sri J.R. Hicks
General Theory of Employment , Interest J. M. Keynes
and Money
A Discources on Political Economy
Jean Jacques Rousseau
Planned Economy for India The Value and Capital
M. Vishveshwaraiva Sri J.R. Hicks
The Canon ( theory ) of Consumer's Surplus Marshall
Big Push Theory
A. R. Rodon Gaurav Datt and Ashwani Mahajan
Prices
Datt & Sundharam's Indian Economy
> According to BHARAT 2025 , The retail inflation rate based on the Consumer Price Index ( Combined ) ( Base 2012-100 ) for 2023-24 decreased to 5.4 % from 6.7 % in 2022-23 . In the financial year ( 2024-25 ) , the average retail inflation rate was 4.8 % between April and ☐ October .
Economic Growth and Development
A term coming from the life sciences , " growth ' in economics means economic growth . An increase in economic variables over a period of time is - economic growth . The most important aspect of growth is its quantifiability , i.e. one can measure it in absolute terms * . ( * As the IMF and the WB considered this yardstick of development as quoted in Gerald M. Meier and James E. Rauch , Leading issues in Economic Development Oxford University Press , New Delhi , 2006. ) All the units of measurement may be applied to show it , depending upon the economic variable , where the growth is being studied . We have a few examples :
1. An economy might have been able to see growth in food production during a decade which could be measured in tonnes .
GDP Growth
> India's GDP at constant ( 2011-12 ) prices grew by 6.7 % and 5.4 % in Q1 and Q2 FY25 , respectively . This implied a real GDP growth of 6.0 % in the first half of the current fiscal . [ Source : Economic Survey 2024-25 ] GDP by expenditure categories India's GDP at constant ( 2011-12 ) prices grew by 6.7 % and 5.4 % in Q1 and Q2 FY25 , respectively . This implied . a real GDP growth of 6.0 % in the first half of the current fiscal . From a demand perspective , Private Final Consumption Expenditure ( PFCE ) firmed up in H1 FY25 , growing by 6.7 % YoY . While National Accounts data is not disaggregated by geography , indicators such as 2 - wheeler and 3 - wheeler sales and tractor sales kilometres . Join on Telegram @apna channels
The growth of road network in an economy might be measured for a decade or any period in miles or
2 .

1. Coffee Board
Bengaluru ( Karnataka ) Kottayam ( Kerala )
Coffee Act , 1942 .
23 Rubber Board
Rubber Act
( Kerala ) , 1947

13. Tea Board
4. Tobacco Board
Kolkata ( West Bengal ) Tea Act , 1953 Cuntur ( Andhra Pradesh ) Tobacco Act ( A.P. ) , 1975

5. The Spices Board Kochi ( Kerala ) 6. National Meat Delhi
Spices Act , 1986 26 Dec , 2008
and Poultry
Processing Board

7. Indian Grape Pune ( Maharashtra ) Processing Board
2nd Jan , 2009
Allied Sectors
The allied sectors of Indian agriculture - livestock , forestry & logging and fishing & aquaculture are gradually becoming sectors of buoyant growth and a potential source of better farm incomes .
The livestock sector grew at a CAGR of 7.9 % during 2014-15 to 2020-21 ( atconstant prices ) and its ontribution to total agriculture GVA ( at constant prices ) has increased from 24.3 % in 2014-15 to 30.1 % in 2020-21 . The annual average growth rate of the fisheries sector . has been about 7 % since 2016-17 and has a share of about 6.7 % in total agriculture GVA . Higher growth in allied sectors compared to the crop sector has obvious
the former in total agricultural GVA

8.6
1,48,78,028 1,61,51,477 1,71,79,842 12,86,885 14,99,114 16,15,253 1,61,64,913 1,76,50,591 1,87,95,095 1,40,76,950 1,54,21,624 1,64,24,210
Net Taxes on Products

16.5
Gross Domestic Product ( GDP )

9.2
Net Domestic Product ( NDP )

9.6 °
Expenditure Components
Private Final Consumption Expenditure ( PFCE ) Government Final Consumption Expenditure ( GFCE ) Gross Fixed Capital Formation ( GFCF ) Changes in Stocks ( CIS )

5.6
93,84,943 99,06,774 1,06,61,785 15,43,991
16,69,675 . 17,32,611

8.1 .

8.8 .
54,37,725 59,15,288 62,78,171
1,99,177 3,05,610 3,18,839 2,35,146 2,69,106

53.4
Valuables
2,71,782
144
37,43,31038,25,494
Exports
40,97,742

2.2
38,59,869.43,90,614 43,41,194
Imports
* 13.8
Discrepancies
-5,19,510 1,49,257
−2,24,641 ,

0.8
GDP
1,61,64,913 1,76,50,591 1,87,95,095
13 %

9.2
Share in GDP
Private Final Consumption Expenditure ( PFCE ) Government Final Consumption Expenditure ( GFCE )

58.1 56.1

56.7

9.6

9.5 :

9.2
Gross Fixed Capital Formation ( GFCF ) :

33.6
1 : 33.5
334
Changes in Stocks ( CIS )

1.2

1.75
Valu

1.45

1.5
Exports

23.2 217

21.8
239
23 : 1
249
Join on Telegram @apna channels

100.0

100.0
National Product
23 .
Gross National Income ( GNI )
$ 1,59,39,376 1,74,04,638 1,85,21,328

9.2

6.4
24 .
Net National Income ( NNI )
1,38,51,412 1,51,75,671 $ 1,61,50,443

6.4
Per Capita Income , National Product and Final Consumption
Population * ( in million )

1.383 1,16,892
1,408 :
1,395 1,26,528 1,33,488 1,15,261 1,24,764 131,544 1,00,163 1,08,786 1,14,705 67,865 71,016 75,723
26 .
Per Capita GDP ( ₹ )

8.2
27 .
Per Capità GNI ( * )

8.2
Per Capita NNI ( ₹ )
28 .

8.6
29 .
PER CAPITA PFCE ( * )

4.6

6.6
t ..
FE : Final Estimates ; FRE : First Revised Estimates ; SAE : Second Advance Estimates * GDP ( Production / Income Approach = GVA at Basic Price + Net Taxes on Products " Following Expenditure Approach , GDP = PFCE + GFCE + GFCF + CIS + Valuable + Export - Import . Discrepancy refers to gap between GDP ( Production / Income Approach ) and GDP ( Expenditure Approach ) . In case of Discrepancy percentage share in GDP is given instead of percentage changes over previous year . * Relates to mid - financial year [ Source : NSO MOSPI Report Q3 28.02.2025 [ Second Advance Estimates of Annual GDP for FY 2024-25 and its Expenditure Components ( at Current Prices )
( * in crore ) 2024-25 ( SAE )
Item
Percentage Change . ver Previous Year $ 2024-25
Sl . No.
2022-233 ( FE ) - ) / ( FRE )
Domestic Product
2,46,46,698 2,74,12,888 3,00,14,893 ) 22,43,775 27,10,068 30,88,322 2,68,90473 3,01,22,956 3.31,03,215 237,61,232 2.67,62,541 2,94,23,836
GVA at Basic Prices

11.2
Net Taxes on Products

20.8 14.0
Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) ® . Net Domestic Product ( NDP ) : Expenditure Components
120

9.9
126

9.9

5. Private Final Consumption Expenditure ( PFCE ) Government Final Consumption Expenditure ( GFCE ) Gross Fixed Capital Formation ( GFCF )
1,65,27,862 1,81,30,431 2,03,54,192

9.7
27,57,628 31,04,298 33,58,066 83,96,038 91,65,224 98,01,025

8.2

12.6
apna kiran

6.9
8 .
Changes in Stocks ( CIS )
2,99,851 4,59,571 4,97,703

53.3

8.3
9 .
Valuables
3,44,489 4,24,919 4,96,532 62,52,419 64,60,982 70,10,639

16.9
10 .
Exports

8.5
11-
Imports
72,13,027 70,92,192 77,76,928 4,74,817 5,30,277 6,38,014 : 2,68,90,173 3,01 22,956

9.7 :
Discrepancies
~ GDP .
GDP
3,31.03 215 3,31,03,215

12.0

19.9
Share in GDP ( % )
Private Final Consumption Expenditure ( PFCE ) .
14 :

61.5

61.5

60.2
Government Final Consumption Expenditure ( GFCE ) .
15 ″

10.3 .
103

10.1
Gross Fixed Capital Formation ( GFCF )

30.4
31 : 2
Changes in Stocks ( CIS )
13 2
Valuables
18 :
Exports
21 : 4

23.3
21 : 2

23.5
Imports -

23.5
26 : 8
21 :
Discrepancies
-1.9 .

1.8

1.8
GDP

100.0
100 : 0
22 .

100.0
National Product
Gross National Income ( GNI )
2,65,20,166 -2,97,10,786 3,26,24,918

12.0
Net National Income ( NNI )
2 : 33,90,925 2,63,50,374 2,89,45,539

12.7
Gross National Disposable Income ( GNDI )

2.23.39,378 3,05,94,001 3,35,83,538
119
Net National Disposable Income ( NNDI ) ⠀⠀⠀

9.8
242,10,137 2,72,33,589 2,99,04,160

12.5
Per Capita Income , National Product and Final Consumption -
1,94,451 2,15,935 2,35,108

11.0
Per Capita GDP ( ₹ )
1,91,773 2,12,981 2,31,711 69,145 1,88,892 2,05579 | 1,97,697 2,19312 2,38,519 1,19,516 1 : 29,967 144,561

11.1
Per Capita GNI ( ₹ )
29 .
PER Capita NNI ( * ) ******
$ 11.7

8.8

10.9
30 .
Per Capita GNDI ( ₹ )
Per Capita PFCE ( 3 )
31 .
FF : Final Estimates ; FRE : First Revised Estimates ; SAE : Second Advance Estimates " GDP ( Production / Income Approach = GVA at Basic Price + Net Taxes on Products
* Pollowing Expenditur AQUA CON Telegram @ang channels Income Approach ) and GDP ( Expenditure Approach ) . In case of screpancy
( Production /
iscre
Diabi
ges over previous year .

3.6
Second Plan 1956-61
Prof. P.C. Mahalanobis

4.21
Third Plan 1961-66
Sukhmoy Chakraborty and Prof. Saddy Ashok Rudra and Alon S. Manney

5.6 .
272

5.7
Fourth Plan 1969-74

2.05
Alike Fourth Five - Year Plan , which is called ' Investment Model of Planning Commission ' . Based on Investment Yojana , Infrastructural changing and trend to growth mode Alike Sixth Five - Year Plan prepared ( Pranab Mukherjee )
Eith Plan
1974-79

4.83
Plan
1980-85

5.51

5.0
ath Plan 1985 90

16.02

5.6
Plan 1992-97
John W. Miller Model ⠀⠀

6.68 .
Sith Pen 1997-02
Created by Planning Commission '

5.5 %
Tenth Plan 2002-07
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

9.0 € 9.0
Eleventh Plan 2007-12
Prepared by Prof C : Rangarajan
Twelfth Plan 2012-17
Prepared by the Planning Commissions
Sources : Planning Commission , Ninth Five Year Plan ( 1997-2002 ) , Vol . I and Tenth Five Year Plan ( 2002-07 ) . INDIA 2016 Annual Plans Between 1966 and 1969 three Annual Plans were formulated within the framework of the draft outline of the fourth plan . The Eighth Five - Year Plan ( 1990-95 ) could not take off due to the fast changing political situation at the Centre . The new government , which assumed power at the Centre in June 1991 , decided that the Eight Five - Year Plan would commence on April 1 , 1992 and that 1990-91 and 1991-92 should be treated as separate Annual Plans . Formulated within the framework of the Approach to the Eighth Five - Year Plan ( 1990-95 ) , the basic thrust of these Annual Plans was on maximisation of employment and social transformation .
In the Nehru - Mahalanobis model the State controlled . the commanding heights of the economy through the public sector : The Gandhian Model of Growth > ' Gandhian Plan ' was brought out by Acharya S.N. Agarwala in 1944 and was re - affirmed in 1948 , formed . the basis of Gandhian model of growth . > The basic objective of this model is to raise the material as well as the cultural level of the Indian masses so as to provide a basic standard of life .
Types of planning
Imperative Planning : In this type of planning the .Central Planning authority decides upon every aspect of the economy and the targets set and the processes delineated . to achieve them are to be strictly followed . This type of planning is mainly practised in the socialist economies . Indicative Planning : In this type of planning the State sets broad parameters and goals for the economy . It is different from centralised planning as unlike in the latter , the State does not see Plan targets to the minutest details , but only broadly indicates the targets to be achieved . It was adopted in our country since the 8th Five - Year Plan , as practised in many developed countries .
> It aims primarily at improving the economic conditions of the villages of India and hence , it lays the greatest emphasis on the scientific development of agriculture and rapid growth of cottage and village industries . > The Gandhian model aims at the reform of agriculture as task , it is operationalised through the Five Year and Annual apna themostimportantsectorineconomic planning in India .
Perspective Planning : It's a type of planning for a long period of time , usually 15-20 years . As a highly specialised
apna kiwhile Nehru wanted to give prime importance to
. Plans . In such form of planning , the planners formulate a perspective Plan that broadly defines the direction desired to be taken by the economy . Rolling Plan : Under the scheme of rolling Plans , there are three different steps . First , a plan for the current year which includes the annual budget . Second , a plan for a fixed number of years , say three , four or five . It is revised every year as per the requirements of the economy . Third , a perspective plan for 10 , 15 or 20 years . Core Plan : Asperthis concept , the Planning Commission asks the states to submit their projected revenue estimates . On the basis of these estimates , Planning Commission determines the expenditure heads for State Annual Plans . This helps in keeping the Plan target to realistic limits and prevents diversion of funds from the priority items to the non - plan account . Models of Economic Development Nehru - Mahalanobis Model : Nehru - Mahalanobis model of development emerged as the driving force of the strategy of development adopted at the time of formulation of the Second Five Year Plan and has continued right up to the eighties . It aimed at enlargement of opportunities for the less privileged sections of the society .
heavy industries , the Gandhian model attempts to give primacy to agriculture supported by handicrafts and cottage industries . LPG Model of Development
> The LPG Model of development was introduced in 1991 by the then Finance Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh . This model was intended to charter a new strategy .. with emphasis on Liberalisation , Privatisation and Globalisation ( LPG ) . > LPG Model of development emphasises a bigger role for the private sector . ➤ It envisages a much larger quantum of foreign direct investment to supplement our growth process . It aims at a strategy of export led growth as against import substitution practised earlier . It also aims at reducing the role of the State signifi- cantly and thus abandons planning fundamentalism in favour of a more liberal and market driven pattern of development . PURA Model of Development The Union Cabinet on 20th January , 2004 accorded in principle approval for the execution of PURA within the gross budgetary support for bridging the rural- urban divide and achieving balanced socioeconomic development .
Growth with social justice was the goal of Nehru- Mahalanobis model since it intended to foster a self- generating path of development with an assurance to the common man that poverty , unemployment , disease and ignorance would be removed so that individuals : could realise their potential with the extension of social
Dr.APJ Abdul Kalam , to eradicate poverty from India , emphasised the adoption of PURA ( Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas ) . Earlier , it was Mahatma Gandhi who underlined the exploitation of rural society and economic etion Telegram @ apnant.Channels
፡፡.

7. Compulsory . unemployment : It means the labour power which is ready to work on the current rate but does not get the work . During Ninth Plan , total 3.6 crore fresh unemployeds began to look for employment . Before its replacement by the ' NITI Aayog ' the Planning Commission had to collect data of unemployment on the basis of ' Lakadawala Formula ' effective from 11th March , 1997 and prior to this the process to collect data was on the basis of surveys of National Sample Survey Organisation ( NSSO ) . . In India , the data relating to unemployment are collected by National Sample Survey Organisation ( NSSO ) . This Organisation has the following concepts with regard to unemployment : 1 : General status of unemployment : In this category , generally , those unemployed for more than one year are included . As such it is a long - term unemployment .. 2 .. Weekly - unemployment : The persons who have not got work for even one hour in a week are included in this category .
3. Daily unemployment : It is considered the best concept of unemployment . The main reasons for unemployment in India are slow economic development , population explosion ; outdated technique , improper education system and limited effect of government planning . > India's unemployment rate among people aged 15 years and above fell to 7.7 % in May , 2023 from 8.5 % in April 2023 , due to a decline in the labour participation at 441.9 million , according to data from the Centre Monitoring Indian Economy ( CMIE ) . Compared to April , labour participation rate . ( LPR ) fell by 1.1 parcentage point to 39.6 % in May , 2023 .
The objective of PURA is to propel economic development without population transfers . The PURA concept is the response to the need for creating social and economic infrastructure which can create a conducive climate for investment by the private ¨sector to invest in rural areas . Although PURA draws its inspiration from the Gandhian model of development which emphasises rural development as a fundamental postulate , yet in the prescription , it is neo - Gandhian in the sense , that it intends to bring rural regeneration with the avowed objective of taking modern technology and modem amenities to the rural areas . It does emphasize the enlargement of employment as the sole objective to make use of rural manpower in various development activities . The PURA model , however , attempts a reconciliation between employment and GDP growth objectives . The 11th Plan ( 2007-12 ) has provided * 248 crores for implementing the PURA scheme in compact rural areas in Public - Private Partnership . ( PPP ) mode . 7. Unemployment and Employment ( Programmes and Schemes ) In common parlance anybody who is not gainfully employed in any productive activity is called unemployed . However , it can be of two kinds 1 . voluntary unemployed and
2. involuntary unemployed . Here we are concerned with the second category of unemployed persons . Hence , unemployment can be defined as a situation when persons able and willing
( to work are seeking jobs at the prevailing wage levelna_kiran but they are unable to get the same . Unemployment in developing economies like India is not the result of deficiency of effective demand in the Keynesian sense , but a consequence of shortage of capital equipment or other complementary resources . In India unemployment is structural in nature due to lack of productive capacity and resources .
[ Source : The ET , 10 June , 2023 ]
Employment trends
As per the 2023-24 annual Periodic Labour Force Survey ( PLFS ) report , the unemployment rate for individuals aged 15 years and above has steadily declined from 6 % in 2017-18 to 3.2 % in 2023-24 . The labour force participation rate ( LFPR ) and the worker - to - population ratio ( WPR ) have also increased .. In Q2 FY25 , the urban unemployment rate for people aged 15 years and above improved slightly to 6.4 % compared to 6.6 % in Q2 FY24 . Both LFPR and WPR also increased during this period . The formal sector in India has seen significant growth , with net Employees ' Provident Fund Organisation ( EPFO ) subscriptions more than doubling from 61 lakh in FY19 to 131 lakh in FY24 . In April -November 2024 , net additions reached 95.6 lakh , driven largely by youth Workers aged 18-25 years contributed to 47 % of the net payroll additions . This indicates a growing trend towards formal employment , which enhances workers access to social security and stability . [ Source : Economic Survey 2024-25 Central Government's Schemes ( 2014-16 ) Scheme
Types of Unemployment-

1. Cyclical unemployment : It is the result of depression in an economy .. Frictional unemployment : This kind of unemployment is temporary . It is the result of a situation when new industries drive out old ones and workers change over to better jobs . Open unemployment : It refers to those who have no work to do even though they are able and willing to do work .. Seasonal unemployment : It means the unemployment . of the farmers and farm labourers during non - crop . seasons . For example , in the period between past harvest and next sowing , agricultural labourers are unemployed . 5. Educated unemployed : This is mainly found in urban areas . Those educated persons who are unable to get work come under this category . Under - employment ( Disguised unemployment ) : It results when a person contributes to production less than what he or she is capable of , for example , an
Date of Announcem
Digital India Programme
21 August , 201
engineer work delegram @apna channels
Deendayal Upadhyay Antyodaya Yo ana
25 August 201
won

1.5
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme ( MNREGS )
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill was passed by Parliament on September 7 , 2005. It secured Presidential assent later in 2005 itself and became an Act ( NREGA ) . The Act provides for at least 100 days of employment to one able bodied person in every rural household every year .
The Act ( NREGA ) came into force from Feb. 2 , 2006 . Initially 200 districts have been selected for the enforcement of the scheme . At present the Act covers all the 740 rural districts of the country . The Govt . of India , on October 2 , 2009 , renamed the ' NREGA as the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act ( MNREGA ) . The Central government and the State governments bear 75 % and 25 % of the cost of material , wages of skilled and semi - skilled workers . The centre has hiked the wages under MGNREGS in the range of 2.33 % to 7.48 % for FY 2025–26 . The MGNREGS wages have seen a hike in the range of * 7 to 26. The MGNREGS wages have been hiked by 7 in 5 states . The highest increase of 26 has been recorded In Haryana , where it will touch the 400 mark .:
According to BHARAT 2025 , Substantial skill training delivery in short - term training indicating improved skill outcomes and employability with 1.56 crore candidates trained since the launch of the scheme in 2015 till October 8 , 2024. Around 54 % of these candidates are in the age group of 15-29 years . Aatmanirbhar Bharat Rojgar Yojana ( ABRY ) ABRY was announced as a part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat 3.0 package to boost the economy , increase the employment generation in post Covid recovery phase Join on Telegram @apna_channels
IE 28.03.2025 ]

10. MID DAX
11 NASDAQ
12 Nikkei

13. S & P
14 Seoul Composite
" = 「 : ,, " ;

15. SHANGHAI Com
China

16. SET
Thailand
17 Straits Times Index Singapore ( SGX ) / SIMEX
Taiwan

18. TAIEN
[ Singapore International Monetory Exchange ( old name ) ] The capital market in India can be classified into : Gilt - edged market or market for Government and semi - government securities ; .. * Industrial securities market ; Development financial institutions and Non - banking financial companies .
t - 4
SMERA Ratings Limited , Headquarter — Mumbai Standard & Poor's ( S & P ) : Headquarter - New York , US MOODY'S Headquarter - New York , US ☐☐ @apna kiFitch : Headquarter - New York , US
The gilt - edged securities market is the market for Government and Semi government securities which carry fixed interest rates .
The industrial securities market is the equities and debentures of companies of the corporate . sector . This market is further classified into- new issue markets for raising fresh capital in the form of shares and debentures ( commonly referred to as primary market ) , and . ( b ) . old issues market ( or secondary market ) for buying or selling shares and debentures of existing companies this market is commonly referred to as the stock market or stock exchange . If shares or debentures of private corporations , primary . sureties of government companies or new sureties and issue of bonds of public sector are sold or purchased in the capital market , then the market is called Primary Capital Market . Secondary Market includes transactions in the stock exchange and gilt - edged market . Merchant Bank , Mutual Fund , Leasing Companies , Risk Capital Companies etc. collect and invest public money into the capital market .
Note : CRISIL is the largest credit rating agency in India , with market share of greater than 60 % [ Source SEBI ] In 1894 , the Ahmedabad Stock Exchange was started to facilitate dealings in the shares of textile mills there . The Calcutta Stock Exchange was started in 1908 to provide a market for shares of plantations and : jute mills ... :
The number of stock exchanges rose from 7 in 1939 to 21 in 1945 . Under the securities contract ( Regulation ) Act of 1956 , the Government of India has so far recognised 23 stock exchanges . Bombay is the premier exchange in the country .. With the setting up of National Stock Exchange , all : regional stock exchanges have lost relevance . The BSE transformed itself into a corporate entity from being a brokers association , from the middle of August , 2005 .
Regulators in India ( As on 29.05.2025 )
Sector Headquarter Banking & Finance , Monetary Policy Mumbai Securities ( Stock ) & Capital Market Mumbai
egulat
Chairperso Sanjay Malhotra ( Governor ) Tuhin Kanta Pandey Debashish Panda
RBI Reserve Bank of India
2 SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India
3 IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Insurance Authority of India PFRDA Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Pension Authority NABARD – National Bank for Agriculture and Financing of rural development Rural Development
Hyderabad
New Delhi Sivasubramanian Ramann
Shri Shaji KV
Mumbai
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

12. AMFI - Association of Mutual Funds in India 13. FIEO - Federation of Indian Export Organisation Export 14 NASSCOM – National Association of Software ☐ and Service Companies
Mumbai
Navneet Munot
S.C.Ralhan
New Delhi
New Delhi
Sindhu Gangadharan
New Delhi Dr. Rajeev Singh Raghuvanshi

15. CDSCO Central Drugs Standard Control Medical Devices and Drugs , Organisation 16. IBBI Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India Finance DCGI ( Drug Controller General of India ) > As a public limited company , BSE ( Bombay Stock Exchange ) is obliged to dilute stock brokers stake to 49 % . > To prevent excessive speculation and volatility in the stock market SEBI has introduced rolling settlements from July 2 , 2001 , under which settlement has to be ... made everyday .
New Delhi Ravi Mital

4. Global Hunger Index Report 2024 - India ranked 105th among 127 countries . Somalia ranked 127th followed by Yemen 126h ) .
Human Development Index 2023-2024 - India ranked 134th in the list of 193 countries ( Switzerland top , Somalia last ) . World Press Freedom Index 2025 - India ranked 151st in the list of 180 countries ( Norway top , Eritrea last ) . Global Peace Index 2024 - India ranked . 116th out of 163 countries ( Iceland top , Yemen is the least peaceful place ) . @ apna - kira 3 countries ( Switzerland top and Angola last ) . Global Innovation Index 2024 - India ranked 39th , out of
5 .
' 1
Some Important Share Price Index of India BSE SENSEX : This is the most sensitive share index of . the Mumbai Stock Exchange . This is the representative index of 30 main shares . Its base year is 1978-79 . ** BSE is the oldest stock exchange of India , founded in * 1875 .
6 .
7 .
BSE 200 : This represents 200 shares of Mumbai Stock Exchange . Its base year is 1989-90 . DOLLEX : Index of 200 BSE Dollar Value Index is called DOLLEX . Its base year is 1989-90 . NSE - 50 From 28th July , 1998 , its name is S and P CNX Nifty . National Stock Exchange has launched a new share Price Index , NSE - 50 in place of NSE - 100 in April 1996 : NSE - 50 includes 50 companies shares . This stock exchange was founded on Ferwani Committee's recommendation in 1994 .

9. World Happiness Report 2025 - India ranked 118th out of 147 countries ( Finland top and Afghanistan last ) . Household Consumption Expenditure Survery 2023-24 ( Based on 75th National Sample : Survey , Aug 2023 - July , 2024 ) ...
Rising Consumption :
> Rural India : Average Monthly Per Capita Expenditure ( MPCE ) rose to 4,122 ( up 9.3 % from 3,773 in 2022-23 ) . Urban India : Average MPCE increased to * 6,996 ( up 8.3 % from * 6,459 in 2022-23 ) . With imputed values for free benefits , MPCE is 4,247 ( rural ) and * 7,078 ( urban ) .
CRISIL , set up in 1988 , is a credit rating agency . It undertakes the rating fixed deposit programmes , convertible and non - convertible debentures , and also * credit assessment of companies . CRISIL 500 is the new share Price Index introduced by Credit Rating Agency the ' Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited ' ( CRISIL ) on January 18 , 1996 . The National Stock Exchange ( NSE ) has launched a new version of its online trading software called ' National Exchange for Automatic Trading ' ( NEAT ) . Ranking of India in Different Indexes ( As on 25.05 : 2025 ) In Edelman Trust Barometer - 2025 , China ranked 1st Indonesia 2nd and India third .
Urban - Rural Gap
The consumption gap narrowed to 69.7 % in 2023-24 , down from 71.2 % in 2022-23 and 83.9 % in 2011-12 . Spending Patterns Rural 47.04 % of MPCE spent on food ; highest on beverages and processed food ( 11.09 % ) , milk products ( 8.44 % ) , and vegetables ( 6.03 % ) Urban : 39.68 % of MPCE spent on food ; higher share of поп- non - food items , especially conveyance and clothing . Non - food itenis dominate : 53 % of rural and 60 % of urban expenditure .
1 .

2. Transparency International India ( TII ) -Global Corruption Perception Index - 2024 India ranked 96th among 180 countries ( Denmark Topped , South Sudan last ) : 3 World Economic Forum's Gender Gap Index 2024- India 129th among 146 countries ( Iceland top , Sudan
Regional Trends
Highest MPCE : Sikkim ( rural 9377 ; urban 13,927 ) . Lowest MPCE : Chhattisgarh ( rural last ) Join on Telegram @apna_channels
2,739 , urban

1. Revenue Deficit refers to the excess of revenue expendi . ture over revenue receipts . [ In fact , it reflects one crucial , fact what is the government borrowing for ? As an individual if you are borrowing to play the house rent , , then you are in a situation of revenue deficit , i.e. while . you are borrowing and spending , you are not creating . any durable asset . This implies that there will be a repayment obligation ( sometime in the future ) and at the same time there is no asset creation via investment . ] Revenue Deficit = Total Revenue Expenditure - Total : Revenue Receipts
" .

10. Indian Fiscal System Fiscal System : It refers to the management of revenue and capital expenditure finances by the state . Hence , fiscal system includes budgetary activities of the government that is revenue raising , borrowing and spending activities . Fiscal Policy Fiscal Policy refers to the use of taxation , public expenditure and the management of public debt in order to achieve certain specified objectives . Indian Fiscal System includes or refers to the management of revenue sources and expenditure of the Central and State governments , Public debt , Deficit financing , Budget , Tax structure etc. Sources of Revenue for Centre : The revenue of the Central Government consists of the following elements :
1. Tax revenue and
2. Non - tax revenue . Tax revenue comes broadly from three sources ( a ) taxes on income .
Non - plan Expenditure + Plan Expenditure
( net tax revenue ,
+ non - tax revenue ) .
A revenue deficit occurs when realized net income is less than the projected net income . This happens when the actual amount of revenue and the actual amount , - of expenditures do not correspond with budgeted " : revenue and expenditures .
2. Budget Deficit refers to the excess of total expenditure ) over total receipts . Here , total receipts include current , revenue and net internal and external capital receipts , | of the government . and expenditure ( b ) taxes on property and capitalpha_kir Budget Deficit = Total Expenditure - Total Receipts
transactions and ( c ) taxes on commodities and services . Non - tax revenue , consists of ( a ) currency , coinage and mint- ( b ) interest receipts and dividends and other non - tax revenue . Sources of Revenue for State : The main sources are ( a ) state tax revenue , ( b ) share in central taxes , ( c ) income from social , commercial and economic service and profits of state - run enterprises . State tax . revenue includes among others , land revenue , stamp , registration and estate duty etc. Expenditure of the Centre : The central government makes expenditures broadly under two heads :
1. Plan expenditure and
2. Non - plan expenditure . Under Plan expenditure comes outlay for agriculture , rural development , irrigation and flood control , energy , industry and minerals , transport , communications , Science and Technology , environment and economic services etc. The major non - plan expenditures are interest payments , defence , subsidies and general services . Expenditure of State Like the Union Government , the State Governments too have two broad heads of . expenditure : ( a ) Non - Development Expenditure and ( b ) Development Expenditure ,
= ( non - plan expenditure + plan expenditure ) - ( Revenue Receipts + Capital Receipts )
3. Fiscal Deficit refers to the difference between total | expenditure ( revenue , capital and loans net of . repayment ) on one hand ; and on the other hand , revenue receipts plus all those capital receipts which are not in the form of borrowings but which in the end accrue to the government . Fiscal Deficit Revenue Receipts ( net tax revenue to i non - tax revenue ) + Capital Receipts ( only recoveries of . loans and other receipts ) -Total Expenditure ( plan and non - plan )
4. Primary Deficit refers to fiscal deficit minus interest | payments . In other words , it points to how much the- government is borrowing to pay for expenses other , than interest payments . Also , it underscores another . key fact : how much the government is adding to future- burden ( in terms of repayment ) on the basis of past and present policy . Primary Deficit = Revenue Deficit - Interest Payments . Monetised Deficit = Increment in Net RBI Credit to the | Central Government .
Public debt of the government of India is of two Budget kinds Internal and External . Internal debt : It comprises loans raised from the open market , compensation bonds , prize bonds etc. , treasury bills issued to the RBI , commercial banks etc.
The Budget of the Government of India , for any year , gives a complete picture of the estimated receipts and expenditures of the Government for that year on the basis of the budget figures of the two previous years . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

12.75 Lakh per annum will pay NIL tax , due to standard deduction of 75,000 . Towards the new tax structure and other direct tax proposals , Government is set to lose revenue of about ₹ 1 lakh crore . The Budget proposes revised tax rate structure under the new tax regime as follows :
Total Income per annum
Rate of Tax
₹ 04 Lakh
NIL
5 %
4-8 Lakh
8-12 Lakh
10 %
15 %
12-16 Lakh
16-20 Lakh
20-24 Lakh
Above 24 Lakh
To rationalize TDS / TCS , Budget doubles limit for tax- deduction on interest earned by senior citizens from the present 50,000 to 1 Lakh . Further , TDS threshold on rent has been increased to ₹ 6 Lakh from ₹ 2.4 Lakh per annum . After the decriminalization of delay in payment of TDS , delay in TCS payments has now been decriminalized . As relief on import of Drugs / Medicines , 36 lifesaving drugs and medicines for treating cancer , rare diseases and chronic diseases have been fully exempted from Basic Customs Duty ( BCD ) .
Source : BHARAT
hos
Finance Commission is a constitutional constituted by the President under Art . 280 I constitution . Since Independence , 15 Fin Commissions have submitted their reports . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2. World Class Institutions Scheme . Anaemia Mukt Bharat
2018

4. Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana ( ABPMJAY ) - National Viral Hepatitis Control
2018
2018
Programme
2019 .
6 .
Fit India Programme :
Jal Jeevan Mission
2019
7 .
Rashtriya Gokul Mission
2019 January , 2020 March 2020
Dekho Apna Desh
9 .

10. Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package Insurance Scheme 11. SVAMITVA ( Survey of Villages Dand Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village Areas ) 12. Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 13. VISVAS Yojana ( Vanchit ikal Samooh aur Vargon ko Aarthik Sahayta Yojana ) .
24th April , 2020
2020
2020-21
eptember 2021
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
$ 14 .
2021 2021
MusQan Initiative
15 .
SVAnidhi Se Samriddhi
16 .
17 Jal Shakti Abhiyan : Catch the Rain KiraigSA : CTR ) 18. PM Vishwakarma Scheme Gender and Child Budgeting
22nd March , 2021
17th September , 2023
From 2005-06 , a separate Statement No. 13 on Gender Budget was included . It provided allocations for women specific programmes . Further , Statement No. 12 on provision for schemes for the Welfare of Children was included from the financial year 2009-10 . It indicated provision for educational outlays , provisions for child " : protection , etc. For the financial year 2024-25 , 3.3 lakh crore have been exclusively allocated by various ministries / departments of the central government for the welfare and empowerment of women . As the Indian concept of welfare transforms into empowerment , India is transitioning from women's development to women- led development , highlights the Economic Survey 2023-24 . The budget allocated for children in the Union Budget for 2024-25 is 1,09,921 crore , which is 2.28 % of the total Budget . This is a 5.51 % increase from the previous year's budget of * .1,04,180 crore .
Jan 1955
1948
1 Feb. , 1964 12 July , 1982
20 March 1985 1990
1Jan 1982

8. Regional Rural Bank ( RRB ) ( Head Office - 2 October , 1975 Kolkata ) . 9. Life Insurance Corporation of India ( LIC ) ( Head
Sept. , 1956
* Office - Mumbai ) .

10. Imperial Bank of India
Source : BHARAT 2025 ] ...
1921 April 1 , 1935 January 1955
11 : Reserve Bank of India ( H.Q - Mumbai )
Demands for Grants
12 ; Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
The estimates of expenditure from the Consolidated * Fund included in the Annual Financial Statement and required to be voted by the Lok Sabha are submitted in the form of Demands for Grants in pursuance of Article .113 of the Constitution . The Demands for Grants are presented to the Lok Sabha along with the Annual Financial Statement . Join on Telegram @apna channels
13 State Bank of India .
July 1 , 1955

14. National Housing Bank ⠀⠀⠀
**** July , 1989
Nov 1 , 1972 July 12 , 1982
15 General Insurance Corporation of India 16 National Agriculture and Rural Development
Bank

11. Money , Banking and Insurance in India The Reserve Bank of India was established on 1st April , 1935 and it was nationalized on 1st January , 1949 . The Finance Ministry issues Currency Notes and Coins of rupee one , all other Currency Notes are issued by the Reserve Bank of India . The first bank of limited liability managed by Indians was Oudh Commercial Bank founded in 1881. Subsequently , Punjab National Bank was established in 1894 ... > Swadeshi movement , which began in 1906 , encouraged the formation of a number of commercial banks .. the states in such manner as may be prescribed byapna_kirThe Banking Companies Act was passed in February , [
the President on the recommendations of the Finance Commission .
1949 , which was subsequently amended to read as Banking Regulation Act , 1949 . Monetary Policy Transmission RBI has reduced repo rate by 250 bps since February 2019 ( the current easing cycle ) . The transmission of policy repo rate changes has been weak on quantity of credit . However , there has been improved transmission on rate structure and term structure . Fifth Monetary Policy of FY 2023-24 Key Rates and Ratios ( As on December 8 , 2023 )
The main sources of Union Tax revenue are Customs duties , Union Excise duties , Service tax , Corporate and Income Taxes Non - Tax revenues largely comprise interest receipts , dividends / profits , fines and miscellaneous receipts collected in the exercise of sovereign functions , regulatory charges and license fees and user charges for publicly provided goods and
services .
Public Debt
The Public Debt of India is classified into three categories of Union Government liabilities into internal debt , external debt and other liabilities .
Rate / Ratio Repo Rate
In %
Internal debt for Government of India largely consists of fixed tenure and fixed rate government papers ( dated securities and treasury bills ) which are issued through

6.50
Standing Deposit Facility

6.25 .
Marginal Standing Facility Rate

6.75
auctions .
Bank Rate

6.75
These includé market loans ( dated securities ) , treasury . bills ( 91 , 182 and 364 days ) and 14 - day treasury bills ( issued to state governments only ) , cash management bills , special securities issued to the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) , compensation and other bonds , non- negotiable and non - interest bearing rupee securities issued to international financial institutions and securities , issued under market stabilization scheme with a view to reduce dependency on physical gold and reduce imports . External debt represents loans received from foreign govemments and multilateral institutions . The Union
Reverse Repo Rate : Cash Reserve Ratio Statutory Liquidity Ration How Monetary Policy Works Monetary Policy , the process by which the central ban manages money supply in the economy , serves man objectives such as price stability and stable econom growth . Monetary policy is the process by which a central ban ( Reserve Bank of India or RBI ) manages money supp Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3.35

4.50
18,07

1. Bank of Baroda

2. Bank of India
1906

3. Bank of Maharashtra
1935

4. Canara Bank
1906 Syndicate Bank

5. Central Bank of India
1911 -

6. Indian Bank 7. Indian Overseas Bank · 8. Punjab and Sind Bank 9. Punjab National Bank : 10 , State Bank of India
1907 Allahabad Bank
1937
New Delhi , Delhi .
1908
New Delhi , Delhi
1894 Oriental Bank of Commerce , United Bank of India
1955 State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur , State Bank of Hyderabad , State Bank Mumbai , Maharashtra
of Indore , State Bank of Mysore , State Bank of Patiala , State Bank of Saurashtra , State Bank of Travancore , Bhartiya Mahila Bank
Kolkata , West Bengal
1943
11 UCO Bank 12 Union Bank of India .
Mumbai , Maharashtra .
1919 Andhra Bank , Corporation Bank
List of Scheduled Frivate Sector Banks ( As on 31.03.2025 ) Established Regd Office / Headquarter 2003 Mumbai , Maharashtra / Ahmedabad , Gujrat
Branches
Bank Name
5,876

1. Axis Bank Ltda .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

4. City Union Bank Ltd.
Kumbakonam , Tamil Nadu
875
1904

5. DCB Bank Ltd.
464
Mumbai , Maharashtra
1930

6. Dhanlaxmi Bank Ltd.
1927
Thrissur , Kerala
( As on 31.03.2024 ) 261 :

7. Federal Bank Ltd.
" Aluva , Kerala
1,518
1931

8. HDFC Bank Ltd.
Mumbai , Maharashtra
9,455
1994

9. ICICI Bank Ltd.
Mumbai , Maharashtra
1994
( As on 31.12.2024 ) 6,742 ;

10. IndusInd Bank Ltd.
Mumbai , Maharashtra
3,063 . : 971
1994

11. IDFC First Bank Ltd.
Chennai , Tamil Nadu .
2015

12. Jammu & Kashmir Bank Ltd.
1938
Srinagar , Jammu & Kashmir
* ( As on 31.03.2024 ) 996
13 .
960 840
Mangaluru , Karnataka
mataka Bank Ltd.
1924
114 .
Karur Vysya Bank Ltd.
Karur , Tamil Nadu
1916

15. Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd.
( As on 31.12.2023 ) 1869
Mumbai , Maharashtra
2003

16. Nainital Bank Ltd.
139
Nainital , Uttarakhand :
1922
561
17 RBL Bank Ltd.
Kolhapur , Maharashtra
1943
18 South Indian Bank Ltd.
955
Thrissur , Kerala
1929

19. Tamilnad Mercantile Bank Ltd.
Thoothukudi , Tamil Nadu
572
1921
1,200+
20 : Yes Bank Ltd.
2004
Mumbai ; Maharashtra

21. IDBI Bank Ltd.
2,000+
1964
Mumbai , Maharashtra
22 Lakshmi Vilas Bank Ltd.
1926
Karur , Tamil Nadu ,
570
1926
The name of UTI Bank has been changed into Axis Bank Ltd. w.e.f. July 31 , 2007 LVBL merged in DBS Bank India Ltd. on 27 November 2020. DBS Bank India Ltd has 280 branches in Asia . Nainital Bank Ltd is a SCB with Bank of Baroda controlling a 98.57 % shareholding in it . Bank owned by State Government : State Bank of Sikkim ( As on 31 March , 2025 ) . Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs ) : There are 43 RRBs in India ( As
On 19th July , 1969 , 14 big commercial banks with deposits worth 50 crores or more and on 15th April , 1980 , six other scheduled banks were nationalised , bringing total number of nationalised banks to 27 ( 19+ SBI + 7 ∙ SBI Associates ) .
on 31st March , 2025 ) .
Foreign BanksThere are 44 foreign banks in Indiana_kirarefore the merger of New Bank of India in Punjab
( as on 31 March , 2025 ) .
Commercial banks mobilise savings in urban areas and make them available to large and small industrial and trading units mainly for working capital requirements . The Indian banking system consists of commercial banks , both in public and private sector , Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs ) and cooperative banks . Commercial banks are broadly classified into nationalised or public sector banks and private sector banks , with a few foreign banks . The public sector banks account for more than 92 % of the entire banking business in India - occupying a dominant position in the commercial banking . The State Bank of India and its associate banks along with another 11 banks are the public sector banks ..
National Bank ( in 1993 ) the total number of nationalised banks was 28 ( 8 * SBI and Associates +14 + 6 ) . After the merger of ' State Bank of Saurashtra ' ( in 2008 ) and ' State Bank of Indore ' ( in 2010 ) in the State Bank of India , the number of Associates of SBI has come to 5 . But now after the merger of State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur , State Bank of Mysore , State Bank of Travancore , State Bank of Patiala and State Bank of Hyderabad with SBI , the numbers of SBI Associates have become zero .
Merger of SBI Associates
The 5 associate banks of SBI State Bank of Bikaner & ( SBBJ ) , State Bank of Mysore ( SBM ) , State Bank of Travancore ( SBT ) , State Bank of Patiala and State Bank of Hyderabad and Bhartiya Mahila Bank ( BMB ) have been merged with State Bank of India since April 1 , 2017 .
No. of SC Banks
According to RBI , number of all Scheduled Commercial Banks is 136 ; which includes 12 PSBS , 21 Private Sector Banks , 43 Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs ) 11 Small Finace Banks ( SFBS ) , 6 Payments Banks ( PBs ) and 44 Foreign Banks . Besides , there are two Local Area Banks ( LABS ) . Oudh Commercial Bank was the first complete Commercial Bank of India .
Reforms in Banking Sector
In recent years , the government has implemented various reforms to enhance credit discipline , responsible lending and governance in the banking sector . * Technological advancements , such as the Jan - Dhan Aadhaar - Mobile ( JAM ) linkage , interoperable Bank Mitras , UPI and DBTs , have significantly expanded digital transactions . The Reform Agenda for Public Sector Banks ( PSBs ) , known as Enhanced Access & Service Excellence ( EASE ) Reforms , focuses on governance , prudential lending , risk management technology - driven banking and HR outcomes . Join on Telegram @apna channels
The Imperial Bank was established in the year 1921 by merging three main Presidency Banks . The largest bank - Imperial Bank was nationalised in 1955 on recommendation of Gorewala Committee and rechristened as State Bank of India . In 1959 , 7 regional banks were nationalised and given the status of Associate Banks of State Bank of India .

4. SLR ( Statutory Liquidity Ratio ) : SLR is the amount a A commercial bank needs to maintain in the form of cash or gold or govt . approved securities ( Bonds ) before providing credit to its customers.SLR rate is determined and maintained by RBI in order to control the expansion of the bank credit . % With the SLR , the RBI can ensure- the solvency of a commercial bank . SLR is used to control inflation , and propel growth . Through SLR rate the money supply in the system can be controlled effectively . 5. Repo Rate : Repo rate is the rate at which commercial banks borrows rupees from RBI . A reduction in the repo rate will help banks to get money at cheaper rate . When the repo rate increases borrowing from RBI becomes more expensive . 6. Reverse Repo Rate : Reverse Repo rate is the rate at : which RBI borrows money from commercial banks . Banks are always happy to lend money to RBI since their money is in the safe hands with a good interest . An increase in reverse repo rate can cause the banks to transfer more funds to RBI due to this attractive interest rates . Reverse Repo Rate is always 1 percent less than the Repo Rate . 7. NEFT ( National Electronic Fund Transfer ) : NEFT enables funds transfer from one bank to another but works a bit differently than RTGS . NEFT is slower than RTGS . The transfer is not direct and RBI acts as the Join on Telegram @apna_channels
The Post Office Savings Bank operates Savings Accounts , Recurring Deposit ( RD ) , Time Deposits TD , Monthly Income Schemes ( MIS ) , Public Provident Fund . ( PPF ) , National Savings Certificate ( NSC ) , Kisan Vikas Patra ( KVP ) , Senior Citizens Savings Schemes ( SCSS ) and Sukanya Samriddhi Account . > Jan Suraksha schemes like the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana ( PMSBY ) and Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana ( PMJJBY ) were launched in 2015 in all the CBS post offices for all post office savings account holders . Atal Pension Yojana ( APY ) was also launched from 2015. Sukanya Samriddhi Account , a new small Savings Scheme for the welfare of girl child , was launched in 2015 .
Postal Life Insurance
Postal Life Insurance ( PLI ) was introduced on February 1 , 1884 , as a welfare scheme for the benefit of postal employees and later extended to the employees of telegraph department in 1888 .

8. RTGS ( Real Time Gross Settlement ) : RTGS system is funds transfer system where transfer of money or securities takes place from one bank to another on a ' real time ' and on ' gross ' basis . Settlement in ' real time ' means payment transaction is not subjected to any waiting period . The transactions are settled as soon as they are processed . Minimum & Maximum Limit of RTGS : 2 lakh and no upper limit . Liquidity Adjustment Facility ( LAF ) : is a monetary policy tool which allows banks to borrow money through repurchase agreements . LAF is used to aid banks in adjusting the day to day mismatches in liquidity . LAF consists of repo and reverse repo operations . 10. Marginal Standing Facility ( MSF ) : MSF rate is the rate at which banks borrow funds overnight from the Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) against approved
[ Source : BHARAT 2025 ]
Demonetisation of Banknotes
The government demonotised 500 and 1,000 banknotes on November 8 , 2016. All 500 and 1,000 banknotes of Mahatma Gandhi series ceased to be legal tenders .in India from November 9 , 2016. New 500 and 2,000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series in exhange for the old banknotes were announced . However , the banknote denominations of 100,50,20,10
government securities . MSF is always 1 % more than the_kiran and 5 of the Mahatma Gandhi series remained legal
Repo Rate ..

11. NOSTRO Account : A Nostro account is maintained by an Indian Bank in the foreign countries .. 12. VOSTRO Account : A Vostro account is maintained by a foreign bank in India with their corresponding bank .. 13. CRAR ( Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio ) : Capital to risk weighted assets ratio is arrived at by dividing the capital of the bank with aggregated risk weighted assets for credit risk , market risk and operational risk . 14. SDR ( Special Drawing Rights ) : SDR are new form of International reserve assets , created by the International Monetary Fund in 1967. The value of SDR is based on the portfolio of widely used countries and they are maintained as accounting entries and not as hard currency or physical assets like Gold . 15. BOND : Publicly traded long term debt securities issued by corporations and governments , whereby the issuer agrees to pay a fixed amount of interest over a specified period of time and to repay a fixed amount of principal maturity . 16. Non Performing Assets ( NPA ) : An asset ( loan ) , including a leased asset , becomes non performing when it stops generating income for the bank . Note : Once the borrower has failed to make interest or principle payments for 90 days the loan is considered to be a non - performing asset .
tender and were unaffected by the policy . The governmet said the demonetisation move was an effort to stop counterfeiting of the current banknotes allegedly used for funding terrorism , as well as a crackdown on black money in the country . [ Source : INDIA 2021 ]

12. Tax System
A compulsory contribution given by a citizen or organisation to the Government is called Tax , which is used for meeting expenses on welfare work . " Tax imposing and . Tax collecting is at three levels in -India- Central level , State level and Local level . * The distribution of tax between Centre and State has been clearly mentioned in the provisions of Indian Constitution . For rationalising it from time to time , Finance Commission has been constituted . The tax system has been divided into two parts :: Taxby Central Government : Custom Duty , Income Tax and Corporate Tax etc : Tax by State Government : The state government has right to collect all the taxes in this category and to spend them . There are two types of taxes :
1. Direct Taxes
2. Indirect Taxes . Direct Taxes : The taxes levied by the central government on incomes and wealth are important direct taxes . The important taxes levied on incomes are - corporation tax and income tax . Taxes levied on wealth are wealth tax , gift tax etc. Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Currency and Coinage
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Ltd. ( SPMCIL ) is the only PSU under the Department

13. Industry
India started her quest for industrial development after independence in 1947 . The Industrial Policy Resolution of 1948 marked the beginning of the evolution of the Indian Industrial Policy . In the Industrial Policy of 1948 , the importance of both public sector and private sector was accepted . However , the responsibility of development of basic industries was handed over to Public Sector . The Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 gave the public sector strategic role in the economy .

9. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited ( RINL ) 10. Shipping Corporation of India Limited ( SCIL ) 11. Rail Vikas Nigam Limited ( RVNL )
ONGC Videsh Ltd.

13. Rashtriy Chcanicals & Fertilizers Limited . 14. IRCON 15 RITES Note ***** ` DPE , MOF , Gol ] There are total 59 CPSEs under Miniratna category T & ( 9 + 10 = 59 ) ( as on 25 May , 2025 )
Grid Controller of India Limited ( GRID - INDIA ) was on March 20 , 2024 conferred with the Status of Miniratna Category - I Central Public Sector Enterprise ( CPSE ) Public Sector . In terms of ownership Public Sector Enterprise ( PSE ) . comprises all undertakings that are owned by the government , or the public , whereas private sector comprises enterprises that are owned by private persons . The main Objectives of Public Sector are : These Navratnas ' included SAIL , IOC , BPCL , HP @ lapna * kiracreation and expansion of infrastructure ; To promote rapid economic development through
BEL , HAL , ONGC and NTPC . Some more PSUs viz . GAIL ( Aug. , 1984 ) , MTNL , NMDC , PFC , PGCIL , REC , NALCO , SCI and CIL were included in this list later . Navratna Public sector enterprises have been given enhanced autonomy and delegation of powers to incur capital expenditure ( without any monetary ceiling ) , to enter into technology joint ventures , to raise capital from domestic and international market , to establish financial joint ventures and to wholly own subsidiary . PSUs were further categorised as " Maharatna " ; ' Navratna ' and ' Miniratna ' CPSEs . List of Maharatna CPSEs ( As on May , 2025 ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited ( BHEL ) Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited ( BPCL ) Coal India Limited ( CIL ) Gas Authority of India Limited [ India ] ( GAIL ) Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited ( HPCL ) Indian Oil Corporation Limited ( IOCL ) National Thermal Power Corporation Limited ( NTPC ) 8. Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Limited ( ONGC ) Power Finance Corporation Limited ( PFCL ) : 10 Power Grid Corporation of India Limited ( PGCIL ) 11 Steel Authority of India Limited ( SAIL ) . 12 Rural Electrification Corporation Limited ( RECL ) 13. Oil India Limited ( OIL ) 14. Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. ( HAL ) . List of Navratna CPSEs ( As on May , 2025 ) limited ( BEL )
To generate financial resources for development ; To promote redistribution of income and wealth ; * To create employment opportunities ; To encourage the development of small scale and ancillary industries ;
1. To promote exports on the new side and import substitution on the other and To promote balanced regional development . Disinvestment and Privatisation There is a difference between privatisation and disinvestment . Privatisation implies a change in ownership resulting in a change in management . Disinvestment is a wider term extending from dilution for the stake of the govemment to the transfer of ownership ( when govt : stake reduced beyond 51 % ) . The Government of India constituted the Disinvestment ? Commission with Mr. G.V. Ramakrishna as the chairman in August , 1996 to advise it on disinvestment . programme of public sector enterprises . It has suggested classification of PSE into core and non core . In core sector maximum of 49 % disinvestment would be allowed while in non core disinvestment would be upto 74 % . PSEs shares will be given to small investors and employees to ensure wide dispersal of shares thus introduce mass ownership and workers shareholding . It has also suggested greater autonomy to PSEs ..
2 .
5 :
Disinvestment Policy
The policy on disinvestment has evolved onsiderably . The policy includes strategic disinvestment by way of sale of tion of
Bharat Electrogoin on Telegram @agra Shares gldings in denisfied
Container Corporation of
of management
control .

15. Trade and Commerce Indian Trade was extremely developed during ancient timė ... After the British East India Company was established in 1600 , the trade between India and Britain was in India's favour till 1757. At that time East India Company used to purchase clothes and spices in exchange for costly metals . The British Government decided to impose heavy Duty on the clothes to destroy the structure of Industries . During the later part of 18th Century , after Industrial revolution in Britain there was heavy production of cheap items . To sell those cheap items in world market , the tradition of colonisation began . British Companies established monopoly on the sale of cotton . As a result , the Indian weaver got costly raw material and thus Indian products became costly . By 1813 , Indian Handloom business was completely ruined : In the later part of 19th Century , the establishment of modern industries on the basis of power machines started : First time in India , the textile industries came into being .
According to WTO Global Trade Outlook and Statistics . April 2024. India ranked 17th in the leading exporter of merchandise trade in the world with share of 18 o in 2023. India's merchandise exports in 2023-24 exhibited a slight decline to USD 437.11 billion from the previous year's high of USD 451.07 billion due to persisting geopolitical tensions . Major product categories and their share in export basket in 2023-24 are : petroleum products ( 19.25 % ) , drug formulations , biologicals ( 4.97 % ) , pearl , precious , semi - precious stones ( 4.33 % ) , telecom instruments ( 3.95 % ) and gold and other precious metal jewellery ( 3.05 % ) . Majoṛ export destinations in 2023-24 and their share are USA ( 17.74 % ) , UAE ( 8.15 % ) , Netherlands ( 5.12 % ) , China ( 3.81 % ) and Singapore ( 3.3 % ) .
Merchandise Imports
According to WTO Global Trade Outlook and Statistics , April 2024. India ranked 8th in the leading importer of merchandise trade in the world with a share of 2.8 % in 2023. Merchandise imports witnessed a decline of ( - ) 5.66 % in 2023-24 , totaling USD 675.43 billion , down from USD 715.97 billion in 2022-23 . Top 5 import categories in terms of share in India's import basket in 2023-24 are : - petroleum : crude ( 20.71 % ) , gold ( 6.74 % ) , petroleum products ( 5.89 % ) , coal , coke and briquettes , etc. , ( 5.76 % ) and electronics components ( 5.09 % ) . The major import sources in 2023-24 were China ( 15.06 % ) , Russia ( 9.10 % ) , UAE ( 7.11 % ) , USA ( 6.04 % ) and Saudi
Foreign Trade
Before independence , the foreign trade of India was being operated on the principles of colonialism . But after independence , there have been huge changes in its state and direction .
After independence , inward looking foreign trade policies were accepted and the policy of imporna_kira
replacement was its base . Volume of India's Foreign Trade After independence , Indian foreign trade has made cumulative progress both qualitatively and quantitatively . Though the size of foreign trade and its value both have increased during post - independence era , this increase in foreign trade cannot be said satisfactory because Indian share in total foreign trade of the world has remained remarkable low . In 1950 , the Indian share in the total world trade was 1.78 % , which came down to 0.6 % in 1995. According to the Economic Survey 2001-02 this share percentage of 0.6 % continued in years 1997 and 1998. According to INDIA 2021 , in FY 2019-20 India is the 18th largest exporter ( with a share of 1.7 % ) and according to INDIA 2020 , the 10th largest importer ( with a share of 2.6 % ) of merchandise trade in the world ...
Arabia ( 4.71 % ) . Services Trade
> According to WTO Global Trade Outlook and Statistics , April 2024 , India ranked 7th in the leading exporter of commercial services in world with a share of 4.4 % and ranked 9th in the leading importer of commercial services in world with a share of 3.4 % in 2023. Over the years , steady surplus is being maintained in services trade . Services exports in 2023-24 stood at USD 341.11 billion up from USD 325.33 billion recorded in 2022-23 exhibiting a positive growth rate of 4.85 % . Services imports in 2023-24 stood at USD 178.32 billion down from USD 182.05 billion recorded in 2022-23 . Trade Balance Taking merchandise and services together , total trade deficit stood at USD 75.53 billion in 2023-24 as compared to USD 121.62 billion during the previous financial year . India's Trade Agreement India has so far signed 14 Free Trade Agreements and 6 Preferential Trade Agreements , out of which , the latest one being India - EFTA TEPA ... India - EFTA Trade and Economic Partnership Agreement ( TEPA ) : India and European Free Trade Association has signed a Trade and Economic Partnership Agreement in March 2024
Balance of payments
The current account balance recorded a deficit of 0.7 % of GDP in 2023-24 as compared with a deficit of 2 % in 2022-23 on the back of a lower merchandise trade deficit . The merchandise trade deficit declined from USD 265.3 billion in 2022-23 to USD 242.1 billion in 2023-24.12 Net FDI inflows declined from declined from USD 42 billion in 2022-23 to USD 26.6 billion in 2023-24
BHARAT 2025 )
[ Source : BHARAT 2025 ]
Global Perspective
Trade Performance
India's global trade ( sum of merchandise and services
According to the International Monetary Fund's World
exports andJoin on Telegram @ apnas023 update , global

1. % to exports . It is also one of the largest employment generators after agriculture , with over 45 million people . employed directly , including many women and the rural population . India exported textile items worth USD 34 billion in 2023 , with apparel constituting 42 % of the export basket ( USD 14.6 billion ) , followed by raw materials / semi - finished materials at 34 % ( USD 11.7 billion ) and finished non apparel goods at 30 % ( USD 7. $ billion ) . Europe and the US consumed nearly 66 % of India's apparel exports , 58 % of finished non - apparel goods and 12 of raw materials / semi - finished materials . Changing trends in the global textile industry As per International Cotton Association , MMF comprised 77 % of global fibre consumption in 2024 , whereas it was just 22 % for cotton . As per World Textile Demand Report , 2024 , by tapping into the MMF value chain , India will benefit from the steady rise in global MMF demand , India's share of global MMF production is currently 9.2 % , and the potential to catch up with the production levels of global leaders like Vietnam , China , and Taiwan is high . Diversification of India's exports to new markets .. Over time , India has added a large number of new products to its export basket . Between 1994 and 2022 , India has notjustcarved out new marketsbuthas become the market leader in some of the new product categories . erofshipping vessels Join on Telegram @apha channels
Trend In India's Trade performance India's total exports ( merchandise + services ) have shown positive momentum in the first nine months of FY25 , reaching USD 602.6 billion , witnessing a YoY growth of 6. This increase demonstrates the resilience of exports , which have been building on a steady upward trend in recent years despite global economic challenges . Total imports during April - December 2024 reached USD 682.2 billion , registering a YoY growth of 6.9 " . This positive import growth indicates a steady demand for goods in the Indian market , supporting domestic consumption and production needs . A more significant increase in overall imports compared . to exports led to a rise in the overall trade deficit from USD 69.7 billion during April - December 2023 to USD 79.5 billion in the corresponding period of FY25 , During April - December 2024 , non - petroleum exports were up by 7.1 " . Over the same peod , non - petroleum
Make s

115.07 , INR .96.27 INR
RBI's Gold Reserve
RBI added nearly 58 tonnes of gold in FY25 , with most stored abroad ; gold now accounts for close to 12 % of total foreign exchange reserves The Reserve Bank of India ( RBI ) added nearly 58 tonnes of gold in the financial year 2024-25 ( FY25 ) , official data released on 5th May , 2025 showed . The central bank now holds 879.59 tonnes of gold in its reserves , of which adenanne Sof FY25
India's Medium - term Outlook According to Economic Survey 2024-25 , the projections for India from the lens of the World Economic Outlook . ( WEO ) of the International Monetary Fund as recently as October of FY25 are sanguine . The IMF WEO projects
India to become ousns trillion Telegram @apna ch
reach a size of USD 6.307 Inflion by

18.98 tonnes were held in the form of gold deposits .: The centralbankhasbeenstoringmoregold domestically since March 2023 , taking the share from 38 % to 59 % in September 2024 . [ Source : BS5 May , 2025 ]
Trade Organisations
IMF International Monetary Fund was established on 27th December , 1945 on the basis of decision taken in the Bretton Woods Conference and it started functioning w.e.f. IN March , 1947 . The total member countries of IMF in 2017 were 188 . The function of IMF is to encourage financial and economic co - operation between member countries and to extend world trade .
@apna_kiruba ( 175 ) and N. Korea ( 176 ) .
IBRD International Bank . for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) was established in 1945 . IBRD along with other institutions is also called World Bank . The other institutions are International Finance . Corporation , International Development Agency and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency . Presently , it is helping member countries in capital investment and encouraging long - term balanced development .. GATT : General Agreementon Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) , came into being on 30th October , 1947 and started functioning from 1st January , 1948 . The principle of GATT was equal tariffs policy , to remove quantitative ban and disposal of business dispute in a democratic way . WTO : On1 " January , 1995 the World Trade Organisation took over the place and position of GATT . The Headquarter of WTO is in Geneva , and the number of its member countries in April 2018 was 164 . India is a founder member of it . The India - ASEAN . Trade in Goods Agreement has come into effect on Jan. 1 , 2010 , though it was signed on August 13 , 2009 . The signing of the India - ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement paved the way for the creation of one of the world's largest Free Trade Areas ( FTA ) -market of
Global Peace Index 2024 : India at 116th Rank * 18 th edition of the Global Peace Index ( GPI ) 2024 was released by the Institute for Economics and Peace ( IEP ) for 163 countries according to their level of peacefulness . GPI is the world's leading measure of global peacefulness . > Iceland ( Rank 1 with score 1.112 ) remains the most peaceful country in the world ; a position it has held since 2008. It is joined at the top of the index by Ireland ( Rank 2 ) , Austria ( Rank 3 ) , New Zealand ( Rank 4 ) and Singapore ( Rank 5 ) . Yemen ( Rank 163rd with score 3.397 ) is the least peacefu country in the world followed by Sudan ( Rank 162 South Sudan ( 161 ) and Afghanistan ( 160 ) and Ukraine ( 159 ) . ☑India is at 116th Rank with a score 2.319 . WEF's Global Gender Gap Index 2024 Global Gender Gap Index Report 2024 was released o June 2024 by the World Economic Forum in Geneva The report assessed countries on four parameters economic participation and opportunity , education attainment , health and survival , and politi empowerment : Key findings of GGG Index 2024 Iceland retained its place as the world's most gender ,
almost 1.8 boiron Telegram @apnay Channels , Norway , Ne
$ 2.75 trillion .
Zealand and Sweden .

0.4
$ 2.23 trillion $ 2.13 trillion
Canada Brazil

1.4 %
$ 53.56 thousand

2.0 %
$ 9.95 thousand Forbes India , 28th April , 2023 )
10 .

16. Some Noteworthy Facts and Definitions India is on the first position in the production of milk , The highest producer of milk in India is Uttar Pradesh . × According to ICAR India is the second largest producer and exporter of Tobacco , after China.and . Brazil respectively .
India is the second largest producer of fruits and vegetables , according to the second AE for 2022-23 . As on 20 Feb , 2024 , the position of India is first as a producer of pulses . Maharashtra is the 1st state which accorded the status . of Industry to agriculture in 1997 .. Central Agmark Laboratory is in Nagpur . First Cotton Industry of the country was established at Fort Closter near Kolkata in 1818 and the second by in Kovas Jee Nana Bhai Dabet mbai in 1854 and was named Bombay Spinning and Weaving Company . > Sindri Fertilizer Factory , Chittaranjan Locomotives , Indian Telephone Industry , Integral Coach Factory ,. Penciline Factory , Indian Telephone Industry were all The country's rank has been consistently rising in theapna_kiestablished during first Five Year Plan . last few years . From 81. in 2015 , it has moved to 39 in 2024 . GII 2024 captures the performance of 133 economies . India held the first position in its region rank in 2022 . [ Source : WIPO Report . 2024 ]
Bottom 5 Countries 143. Zimbabwe , 144. Malawi , 145. Lebanon , 146. Sierra Leone , 147. Afghanistan . ( Source : WHR 2025 ] Global Innovation Index 2024 With a score 38.3 India has its rank on 39 in the Global Innovation Index ( GII ) 2024 prepared by the World In- tellectual Property . Organization ( WIPO ) .
Some Definitions .
Rules of Origin : According to WTO : Rules of origin are the criteria needed to determine the national source of a product . Their importance is derived from the fact that duties and restrictions in several cases depend upon the source of imports .
Global Hunger Index 2024 > In the 2024 Global Hunger Index , India ranks 105th out of the 127 countries with sufficient data to calculate 2024 GHI scores . With a score of 27.3 , India and Uganda have a level of hunger .. Top 10 Economies in the World - 2025 GDP serves as a key metric for assessing the magnitude of a nation's economy The conventional approach for . gauging a country's GDP involves the expenditure method , wherein the total is derived by aggregating expenditure on fresh consumer goods , new investments , government outlays , and the net value of exports .

1.j
Rules of origin are used to implement measures and instruments of commercial policy , such as anti - dumping duties and safeguard measures ; to determine whether imported products shall receive most - favoured - nation ( MFN ) treatment or preferential treatment ; for the purpose of trade statistics ; for the application of labelling and marking requirements ; and fer govemment procurement . Forex reserves : According to ET , Forex reserves are foreign currency assets held by the central banks of countries . These assets include foreign marketable securities , monetary gold , special drawing rights ( SDRs ) and reserve position in the IMF ... * The main purpose of holding foreign exchange reserves is to make international payments , and hedge against exchange rate risks . Infant Mortality Rate : According to WHO , Infant Mortality Rate is the probability of a child born in a specific year or period dying before reaching the age of one , if subject to age - specific mortality rates of that period . Infant mortality rate is strictly speaking not a rate ( i.e. the number of deaths divided by the number of population at risk during a certain of time ) derived from a life
***
Rank Country
GDP ( USD )
2025 Projected
GDP Per Capita ( Current Prices ) ( USD )
Real GDP ( % Change )
United
$ 30.51 trillion 1.8 %
$ 89.11 thousand
States
( U.S )
China
$ 19.23 trillion 4.0 % Germany $ 4.74 trillion 0.1 % India
$ 13.69 thousand $ 55.91 thousand $ 2.88 thousand $ 33.96 thousand $ 54.95 thousand

6.2 %
$ 4.19 trillion
5 Japan

0.6 %
$ 4.19 trillion
United
$ 3.83 trillion $ 3.83 trillion

1.1 %
Kingdom Join on Telegram @apha Cl
channels
( UK )
Subject by chan

1.O.U. It means ' I owe you ' . It is non - negotiable promissory note indicating the debt owed by one party to another . IRA Individual Retirement Account is a pension plan with tax advantages . IRAs permit investment through intermediaries like mutual funds , insurance companies and banks or directly in stocks and bonds through stockbrokers . Joint Stock Company : It is a form of company in which a number of people contribute funds to finance a firm in return for ' shares in the company . Keogh plan : Tax - advantaged personal retirement program that can be established by a self - employed individual . Legal Tender : It is the currency ( coins and bank notes ) which have to be accepted in payment .
Leverage : The effect on a company when the company has bonds , preferred stock , or both outstanding . Example : If the earnings of a company with 10,00,000 common shares increases from $ 1000000 to $ 1500000 , earnings per share would go up from $ 1 to $ 1.50 , or an increase of 50 % . But if earnings of a company that had to pay $ 500000 in bond interest increased that much , earnings per common share would jump from $ .50 to $ 1 a share , or 100 % . Liabilities : All the claims against a corporation . Liabilities include accounts , wages and salaries payable ; dividends declared payable ; accrued taxes payable ; and fixed or long - term liabilities , such as mortgage bonds , debentures and bank loans . Limit , limited order or limited price order : An order to buy or sell a stated amount of a security at a specified price , or at a better price , if obtainable after the order is represented in the trading crowd . " - Liquidation : The process of converting securities or other property into cash . The dissolution of a company , with cash remaining after sale of its assets and payment of all indebtedness being distributed to the shareholders . Liquidity : The ability of the market in a particular security to absorb a reasonable amount of buying or selling at reasonable price changes . Liquidity is one of the most important characteristics of a good market . Listed stock : The stock of a company that is traded on a securities exchange . Locked in : Investors are said to be locked in when they have profit on a security they own but do not sell because
Money Market : It is a market engaged in short - term lending and borrowing of money , linking together the financial institutions , companies and the government . Monopoly : It is a type of market structure having one seller and many buyers . There is a lack of substitute products and entry of new firms into market is not possible . Mortgage bond : A bond secured by a mortgage on a property . The value of the property may or may not equal the value of the bonds issued against it . MoU : The concept of Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) was introduced in 1988. The main objective of MoUis to reduce the quantity of control and increase the quality o accountability . The emphasis is on achieving the negotiated and agreed objectives rather than interfering in the day - to- day affairs . Mutual Fund It is a form of collective investment tha ! is useful in spreading risks and optimising returns : ☐ Nasdaq : An automated information network th provides brokers and dealers with price quotations of securities traded over - the - counter . Nasdaq is an acronym for National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations . National Income : It is equal to the total money val of goods and services produced over the given time perio less capital consumption . Negotiable : Refers to a security , the title to which transferable by delivery Join on Telegram @apna channels

18. Miscellaneous
According to RBI , Under the earlier qualifying assets criteria , a Non - banking Financial Company- Microfinance Institution ( NBFC - MFI ) is required to have minimum 85 % of its net assets as ' qualifying assets ' . The definition of ' qualifying assets ' of NBFC- MFIs is now being aligned with the definition of ' microfinance loans ' . The minimum requirement of microfinance loans for NBFC - MFIs also stands revised to 75 % of the total assets . Under the earlier guidelines , an NBFC that does not qualify as an NBFC - MFI , cannot extend microfinance loans exceeding 10 % of its total assets . The maximum limit on microfinance loans for such NBFCs ( i.e. , NBFCs other than NBFC - MFIs ) now stands revised to 25 % of the total assets . * Government of India launched Smart Cities Mission : ( SCM ) on 25 , June 2015 . SMILE ( Support for Marginalized Individuals for Livelihood and Enterprise ) : The scheme launched in 2022 for the welfare measures of the transgender community and for persons who are engaged in the act of begging .. Industries are classified into three categories Primary ( Extracting and Agriculture ) , Secondary ( Manufacturing ) and Tertiary ( Services ) .: Banking , Financial Services and Insurance ( BFSI ) is the industry's umbrella term for companies that provide a range of such financial products or services . Four members Ajay Narayan Jha , Annie George , Dr. Niranjan Rajadhyaksha and Dr. Soumya Kanti have been appointed as members of 16th Finance Commission on January 31 , 2024 . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Zero coupon bond : Also known as treasury bills . A bond that pays no interest but is priced , at issue , at a discount_kiran from its redemption price .
FAQs ..
➤ The existence of a large parallel economy , fluctuations . in agricultural and industrial output and indirect . taxation are the reasons for : cost - push inflation . Among the supply side measures to contain iflation is : to increase the supply of products or commodities . Level playing field ' argument industries requires : Domestic industry to be treated at par with MNCs > One of the disadvantages of the Wholesale Price Index in India is that : It does not cover the services sector > Checkoffsystem refers to the verification of membership * through : deduction of subscription from pay Direct taxation is a better form of taxation because : it allows for taxation according to means Textiles
> Multi Fibre Agreement deals with : Open market operation of RBI Refers to :
trading in securities . The new definition of fiscal deficit was suggested by : Chakravarthy Committee According to the Chakravarthy Committee , one of the principal causes affecting price stability in India is :
3. Violent fluctuation in agricultural production The first bank managed by Indians was : .. Oudh Bank The permit for duty free trade issued by the East India Company at a price to private traders was called :
Diwani

1. Architecture
The art of building is known as ' Architecture ' . In India , the story of architecture begins with Harappan Civilization ( Indus Valley Civilization ) .
Harappan Architecture ...
The important buildings of Harappan civilization are ( in descending order of their sizes ) -

2. Stupas ..
A stupa is originated in India prior to 5th century BC as tombs of holy men and evolving afterwards into sacred . sites dedicated to the Buddha . The clay - built stupa of Lauriya Nandangarh ( West Champaran district , Bihar ) and the brick - built stupa of Piprahwa ( Siddharthnagar district , U.P. ) are specimens of Pre - Mauryan Stupas . In other words , these stupas were forrunner of Mauryan Buddhist Stupas . A Stupa i.e memorial is one of the three major forms of Budddhist architecture ( other two forms are _Chaitya i.e. worship - place and Vihara i.e. monastery & learning centre ) .. ➤ Stupa literally means a heap ( mound ) of clay . Initially stupa was built by clay but later by bricks and stones over the grave or residues ( like ash , bone , tooth ; nail , hair etc. ) of a holy man ( Gautam Buddha , Buddhist monks ) ..
Located at Mohenjodaro
Name
Great Bath
Mohenjodaro
Official Residence / Priest Residence
Dholavira
Giant Reservoir
Нагарра Lothal Mohenjodaro
Great Granery
Dockyard Assembly Hall
Burnt bricks were used as a base - material for the construction of the buildings of Harappan civilization ( absence of stone building ) . The burnt bricks were joined with the help of mud ( in most cases ) , gypsum ( in drainage ) and bitumen ( in the Great Bath ) . They had no knowledge of sand , cement and red lime in joining the bricks for construction of buildings .
Harappan people had made their buildings solid and durable rather than beautiful . A.L. Basham rightly remarks , " The utilitarian brick buildings of the . Harappa Culture , strong and competent they were , had apparently the little aesthetic merit " . With exception of the wall of Rajgrih ( modern Rajgir , Nalanda district , Bihar ) we have no significant architectural remains between the Harappan period and Mauryan period . This is due to the fact the few buildings were made of stone during this time - interval . Mauryan Architecture Since the Pre - Ashokan architecture were mostly made of wood and other perishable materials , hence they had no remains . The general use of stone in architecture began with Ashokan time . The replacement of wood by stone in architecture may had been partly due to the influence of contact . with Achaemenid empire of Persia ( where stone was extensively used ) and partly due to the denudation of the forest in the Gangetic plains .
Basic Features of a Stupa

1. Astupaisahemispherical dome - like solid structure into which one cannot enter .

2. A stupa is built over the residues ( like ash , bone , · tooth , hair etc. ) , which are kept in a casket at the base or top of the dome .
3. There is circumambulatory passage or walkway ( Pradakshina Patha ) around the Stupa which is enclosed byrailing ( Vedika ) runningaroundthebase of the dome . It usually bears low - relief inscriptions depicting protective deities , mythological events and other religious iconography . Vedika ( railing ) : Sanskrit word Vedika refers to the outer railing around a sacred monument or objectinarchitecture . It often encloses a space for walkway around the central monument .
There are four gateways ( toranas ) for entrance located at the four cardinal points . In Sanchi stupa , there are four gateways at four directions namely east , west , north and south . Torana ( gateway ) : Sanskrit word Torana refers to a gateway for ceremonial purposes in architecture . The origin of Torana has traced in gram - dwar ( village gateway ) of Vedic period village which later evolved as a popular adornment for cities and sacred places . 5. At the top of the dome is square - like structure . called ' Harmika ' . From Harmika , rises a stick ) ( Yashti ) which holds the triple umbrella ( Chhatras ) a sign of royality and dignity . Join on Telegram @apna channels
The architectural remains of Mauryan period are found in three forms Palaces , Stupas & Caves .

1. Palaces
Contemporary Greek writers ( Megasthenese & Others ) refer to the magnificent palaces and halls in the capital city of Patliputra and regard them finest as that of Susa & Ecbatana ( two famous cities of Persia ) .

1. Amaravati Stupa ,
2. Nagarjunikonda Stupa , 3 : Bhattiprolu Stupa ,
4. Goli Stupa , 5. Jagayyapeta Stupa , 6. Ghantsal Stupa , 7. Peddaganjam Stupa ,
*** Sanchi Stupa
According to Buddhist tradition , 84,000 Stupas were bullt by Mauryan ruler Ashoka but it is exaggerated figure . Chinese Pilgrims Fahien , Hiuen Tsang are said to have seen a considerable number of these stupas , in which majority of them were perished in course of time . However , a few of these stupas have survived . The stupas of Sanchi , Sarnath , Bharhut , Tuxila etc. were originally built by Ashoka and they were extended and enlarged by the Buddhist patrons of post - Mauryan rulers . Sanchi Stupa is typical one of such example .
3. Caves Mauryan caves are the earliest examples of rock - cut architecture in which Sudama Cave is the oldest . These caves hewn from solid rocks . Their interior walls are so well polished that they appears smoothy and shiny as mirrors . These caves were built by Mauryan rulers Ashoka and his grandson Dasharatha and donated to Ajivikas ( the followers of Makkhali Goshala ) and Buddhist monks . These caves are situated in the twin hills of Barabarona ( 4 caves , built by Ashoka ) and Nagarjuni ( 3 caves , built by Dasharatha ) , located in Jehanabad district of Bihar . Caves of Barabar Group :
1. Sudama Cave ( donated to Ajivikas )
2. Vishwa Jhonpari Cave ( donated to Ajivikas )
3. Kara Chopar ( donated to monks )
4. Lomash Rishi Cave . Caves of Nagarjuni Group :
1. Gopi Cave ( donated to Ajivikas )
2. Vadathi Cave ( donated to Ajivikas )
3. Vapia Cave / Mirza Mandi ( donated to Ajivikas ) . The details of two famous caves ( Sudama Cave & Lomash Rishi Cave ) display a clear - cut influence of wooden architecture on rock - cut architecture . The rock - cut architecture of Mauryan period marks the beginning of a great tradition which would span the next 1,000 years in the history of Indian art . Post - Mauryan Architecture . Post - Mauryan architecture is divided into 3 phases- Sunga , Satavahana and Kushan phases . Sunga Architecture Though Buddhist texts depict Sunga rulers as perscutor of Buddhist faith but they were not so . Architectural remains of Sunga period are construction of Bharhut Stupa , stone - built Stupa & railing in the place of brick - built Stupa & railing of Sanchi , railing at Bodhgaya Stupa , construction of Stupa , Chaitya & Vihara at Bhaja ( near Pune ) etc. Satavahana Architecture ➤ The Stupa , Chaitya and Vihara are 3 main forms of
Krishna district
Prakasham district
Note : Nagarjunikonda Stupa was built during Ikshawaku : period . The rest Stupas were constructed during Satavahana period . Chaityas 1 Bhaja , Bedsa , Junnar & Karle Chaitya & Viharas , Pune dist , Maharashtra
Kanheri Chaitya & Maharashtra
3. Kondana Chaitya Maharashtra
Vihara bai dist . ,
Viharas
& Vihara , Kolaba dist . ,

4. Nasik Chaitya & Vihara , Nasik dist . , Maharashtra 5. Pitalkhora & Ajanta Chaitya & Viharas , Aurangabad dist . , Maharashtra Note : There are very few inscriptions mentioning the names of artisans such as Kanha at Pitalkhora and his disciple Balaka Kondana cave . Kushan Architecture :
Kushan ruler Kanishka was a great patron of art : The architectural remains of Kushan period are- Purushpur ( modern . Peshawar ) Stupa ( now - a - days identified as Shahji ke Dheri ) , Kanishkpur town ( in Kashmir ) , Sirmukh ( a part of Tuxila city ) , Devkula temple & Naga temple of Mathura etc.
> >
Gupta Architecture
The architectural remains of Gupta period are available in the forms of temples , rock - cut caves etc.
Temples
The temples are thebestspecimens of Gupta architecture . In fact , the remains of temples start being found in India from Gupta age . Not satisfied with caves , the Gupta was the first dynasty to build permanent free standing temples ( structural temples ) and so they began a long tradition of Indian temple architecture . Gupta temples were built on a high platform ( Jagati / the centre of the Jagati stood the principal ☐ Adhisthan ) . I shrine which was accessed by a flight of steps on all four sides . Four lesser shrines stand at each corner of the complex . Initially the roofs of temples were flat , but later on they also started making Shikharas ( superstructure of temple ) . A rectangular or square room was buit inside the idol was installed . It was the temple in which the Buddhist archijen on Telegram @apna channels

1. Superstructure Curvilinear tower ( Shikhara )
2. Ground plan Square - shape
( Vargakaar )

3. Gateway
Simple gateway
Huge
gateway
( Saral Praveshdwar ) ( Vishal Gopuram )
Temples of Madhya Pradesh
Nagar Style :
( Dravida Style

1. Temples of Khajuraho Group : Amongst temples of Madhya Pradesh , temples of Khajuraho ( Chhatarpur district ) are very famous . The temples of Khajuraho were built by Chandela Kings during 9th - 12th century AD . According to local tradition there were 85 temples but now only 25 templès are left . These temples are concerned with Shaivite , Vaishnavite , Shakt and Jain religion . Among Shavite temples Kandariya Mahadev temple is very famous . Since the gateway of this temple looks like a Kandara ( cave ) and main deity is Mahadev therefore this is called Kandariya . Mahadev temple . It was built by Chandela king Dhangdeo ( iii ) In this style the basic planning and design is Dravida Style Le . it has Mimara ( Pyramidal oin on Telegram @apna channels
Vésar Style
The main points of Vesar style are as follows- ( i ) Vesar is a Sanskrit word which literally means Khachchar ( a mule i.e. offspring of a niale donkey . and a female horse ) . Thus Vesar style means hybrid style ( Dravida style + Nagar style ) . ( ii ) : It is basically a modified form of Dravida style of
architecture ...

1. Surya ( Sun ) temple of Modhera ( Mehsana dist ) : built by Solanki ruler Bhim in 1026-27 .

2. Someshwar Mahadev Temple of Somnath ( Junagarh dist . ) : rebuilt by Solanki ruler Bhim ..
3. Neelkanth Mahadev Temple of Sunak ( Mehsana dist . ) built by Solanki ruler Jaisingh Siddhraj in 1095 .

4. Rudramahalaya / Rudramal Temple of Siddhpu : ( Patan dist . ) : built by Solanki ruler Jaisingh Siddhraj . Neminath & Mallinath Temple of Girnar parvat / Raiwatgiri / Raiwatak parvat ( Junagarh dist ) Neminath temple built in 1128-29 ; Mallinath temple built by Vastupal & Tejpal Chaumukhi Adinath Temple at Satrunjay Pahari of Palitana ( Bhavnagar dist . ) : built by a rich merchant in 1618 ...
Temples of Vesar Style
The Vesarstyle temples were built by the Early Chalukya of Badami ( 543-757 ) , the Rashtrakuta of Manykhet ( 752-973 ) , the Western Chalukya of Kalyani ( 973-1190 ) and the Hoyasala of Dwarsamudra ( 12th - 14th century ) . During the time of Early Chalukya of Badami , temples of both Nagarand Dravidastyleswerebuiltsimultaneously in Aihole and Pattadkal in 7th - 8th century . For example , at Pattadkal Papnath temple built in Nagar style and Sagameshwar & Virupaksh temples built in Dravida style . Because of this it was very natural that architects introduced a new style - Vesar style - by combining both the styles . Rashtrakuta Architecture ( 752-973 ) : Cave temples of Ellora and Elephanta are the specimens of architecture of Rashtrakuta period . Ravan ki Khai , Dashawatar , Kailashnath temple etc. are notable among cave temples of Ellora . Trimurti of Maheshwar , Shiv Tandav ( Natraj ) , Shiv Parvati Vivah etc. are remarkable among cave temples of Elephanta . Notable temples built during the time of Wester Chalukya rulers of Kalyani and Hoyasala rulers of Dwarsamudra are - Kalleshwar temple ( Kuknoor , Koppal dist . , Karnataka ) , Lakkundi / Laukikgundi Jain temple ( Dharwad dist . ) , Mukteshwar , Siddheshwar Someshwar & Siddh Rameshwar temples : ( Dharwad dist . ) , Mahadev temple ( Ittagi ) , Kashi Vishweshwar temple ( Kakkundi ) , Mallikarjuna temple ( Bellary dist . ) , Hoyasaleshwar temple ( Halebid ) etc.
AD etc ...
Temples of Rajasthan : Among the temples of Rajasthan Dilwara's Jain temples are the most famous These temples are located on Mount Abu ( Arbud Parvat ) at Dilwara in Sirohi district . These temples are made of white marble of Makrana . From the point of view of . art , Taj Mahal is inspired by Dilwara's Jain temple . The number of temples at Dilwara is 5 , out of which 2 were built in pre - medieval period and the rest 3 were built in medieval period .
1. Vimal Vasati / Rishabhdeo Temple ( 1031 ) : built by Vimal Shah ( a minister of Solanki ruler Bhim ) that's why this is called Vimal Vasati ( vasati / vasadi = jain temple ) ; Main deity - Rishabhdeo / Adinath , therefore this is known as Rishabhdeo temple ; famous for fine carving and amazing sculptures ; the earliest example of Jain architecture .
2. Lun Vasati / Tejpal - Vastupal / Devarani - Jethani / Neminath Temple ( 1230 ) : built by Tejpal & Vastupal ( two Jain ministers of Solanki ruler Vir Dhawal ) to commerorate the memory of their late brother Lun ; the statues of Devarani and Jethani ( the spouses of Tejpal and Vastupal ) built at two sides of door of the temple ; main deity : Neminath .
3. Parshwanath / Chaumukh Temple ( 1458 ) : built by ... Mandalik ( a jain follower ) ; main deity : Parshwanath ; the highest temple in Dilwara temples .
4. Rishabhdeo / Adinath temple ( 1468 ) : built by Bhima Shah ( a minister of Mehmud Begara , Sultan of Ahmedabad ) ; main deity : Rishabhdeo / Adinath ; the idol of Rishabhdeo Was built in Panchdhatu in which main metal is Pital . 5. Mahavir Swami Temple ( 1582 ) : main deity : Mahavir Swami , 24th and the last Teerthankar of Jain religion .
kiran
Temples of Dravida Style
The Dravida style temples were built by the Pallava c Kanchi , Chola of Tanjore and Pandya of Madural in early medieval period . Pallava Architecture ( 575-897 ) : Pallava rulers of Kanch laid the foundation of Dravida style . Four styles C temple architecture developed during the Pallav period : Join on Telegram @apna channels

4. Introduction of Tomb ( Maqbara ) Maqbara is an Arabic word that literally means a building built over the > Pandya Architecture ( 1190-1311 ) : Dravida style grave ( Qabr ) . The practice of burial of dead , as distinct continued to flourish during the reign of Pandya rulers , from the cremation practiced by the Hindus , introduced but no important temple was built , but bounadry walls tomb ( maqbara ) . A tomb is usually a domed ( Huzara ) with started being built around the temple . These bounday a Mihrab in the western wall and the real grave ( Qabr ) in walls were simple but their entrances which are called Gopurams were grand , huge and ornate . In this way the apn an underground chamber . However bigger tombs have a annu speciality of Pandyan architecture is not the temples , mosque ( masjid ) also and the whole structure is laid in the but it is the Gopurams . The construction of Gopurams _middle of a sprawling lawn . ❖ are found in Tirumalai temple , Chidambaram temple , Kumbkonam temple etc.

5. New Theme of Ornamentation decoration was common between Hindu and Muslim architectures . But there were major differences in their themes of ornamentation . The Hindu style of ornamentation . was largely naturalistic showing human and animal forms and luxuriant vegetation . As among the Muslims the representation of living being was taboo by way of decoration . They introduced geometrical and Arabian patterns , ornamental writing ( calligraphy ) , inlay work , used of glazed tiles , carved screens and formal representation of plant and floral life .. 6. New Materials for Construction : Although lime was known and to a certain extent used in construction work in India , yet mud was generally used for brick work and large blocks of stones were laid one on top of the other and held by means of iron clamps . But the Muslims made extensive use of concrete and lime mortar as materials for construction . The Muslims also used lime as plaster and a base for decoration : Sultan's Contribution in Development of Architecture Sultanate architecture are divided into 4 phases - Early Turk , Khalji , Tughlaq and Sayyed - Lodi phase . Early Turk Phase : 1206-90 Qutubuddin Aibak ( 1206-10 ) Although Aibak declared himself Sultan in 1206 , he began his architectural activities with the conquest of Delhi ( 1193 ) . Heconverted Oila Rai Pithaura into the capital . A mosque was built in in on Telegram Telegram @apna channelson as Jami
Ornamental
Sultanate Architecture I. The Dehi Sultanate Architecture . A new style of architecture that developed under the patronage of the Turk - Afghan rulers of Delhi Sultanate is called Indo - Islamic style . In Indo - Islamic style there was a fine and balanced synthesis of Hindustani Shahteerii.e . Trabeate tradition ( architecture tradition based on beam ) and Islamic Mehrabi i.e. Arcuate tradition ( architecture tradition based on arch ) . Characteristic Features of Indo - Islamic Architecture . The characteristic features of Indo - Islamic architecture were derived from both Hindu and Muslim sources though not in equal measure . In Delhi Sultanate architecture Islamic influences are predominent , but such was not the case with regard to buildings . constructed in provincial architecture like Bengal , Bijapur , Gujarat etc. The characteristic features of Indo - Islamic architecture are as follows-
1. Introduction of Arch ( Mehrab ) , Dome ( Gumbad ) The Muslims are credited with the introduction of true arches in India . The introduction of the arches replaced flat lintels or corbelled ceilings . The Muslims also introduced done . A dome is a convex covering usually hemi - spherical or semi - elliptical or firculator polygonal dome the pyramidar roof of spire came to rep

2. Tomb of Khan Shaheed : Situated near at tomb of Balban , Muhammad Khan was the elder son of Balban and know as Khan Shaheed because he lost his life in fighting against Mongol in 1285 .
Khalji Phase : 1290-1320
> The second phase of development of Indo - Islami architecture completed during Khalji Sultans it 1290-1320 . The influence of Islamic style on buildings of this period is very clear . Khalji Sultans could rule only for 30 years , naturally they could built very few buildings . Among these buildings Alal Darwają , Jamatkhana Masjid etc. are notable . Alauddin Khalji ( 1296-1316 ) : Alauddin Khalji was very fond of architecture . He founded a new city Siri and built some buildings . ·
1. Foundation of a New City Siri : In 1300 Alauddin Khalji founded a new city Siri at Siri village ( located in the North of Qutub area , Delhi ) . Inside the city , Alauddin Khalji built a palace named Hazarsutun Mahal ( a palace that has 1,000 pillars ) . At western side of city , a giant pond named Hauz - i - Khas or Hauz - i - Alai was built by Alauddin Khilji .
2. Alai Darwaja Constructed as southern gate of Kuwwat - ul - Islam masjid ; named after its constructer Alauddin Khalji , completed in 1310-11 ; horseshoe - shaped arch ; earliest example of true arch in India ; real monument of Alauddin Khalji's pride .
3. Alai Minar : Alauddin Khalji wanted to build a Minar twice the height of Qutub Minar , but it could not happen He was able to built only one storey of Alai Minar when he @apna kid . After his death , no one took interest in continuing this ] .
Iltutmish ( 1211-36 ) : Iltutmish was very fond of architecture . There was all - round development of architecure during his time . He completed the construction of Quwwat - ul - Islam , Adhai Din ka Jhonpara & Qutub Minar that had started during the time of Aibak . The building built by Iltutmish were- Sultanghari / Sultangarhi ie . Tomb of Nasiruddin Mehmud , Tomb of Iltutmish etc. He was known as ' the Father / Founder of Maqbara ( Tomb / Mausoleum ) Architecture ' :
1. Sultanghari / Sultangarhi / Tomb of Nasiruddin Mehmud Located in Malkapur , Delhi ; first example of Maqbara ( Tomb / Mausoleum ) ; built in the memory of Prince Nasiruddin Mehmud ; year of construction : 1231-32 .
project as a result it could not be completed . But incomplete Minar gives a suffice idea of its grandeur .

4. Jamatkhana Masjid : Situated in the campus of Nizamuddin Auliya Dargah , earliest example of Masjid completely based on Islamic ideals ..
➤ Successors of Alauddin Khalji : The buildings built by successors of Alauddin Khaljiare - Nizamuddin Auliy Dargah ( built by Khizr Khan , son of Alauddin Khali Ukha Masjid ( located at Bayana , Bharatpur , built by Malik Kafur in 1320 during the reign of Kutbuddi Mubarak Khalji ) .
Tughlaq Phase : 1320-1414
➤ The third phase of development of Indo - Islami _architecture completed during Tughlaq Sultans it

2. Tomb . of Iltutmish : Situated in North East of Quwwat - ul - Islam mosque , Mehrauli , Delhi ; beginning year of construction : 1235 .
3. Other Buildings Shamshi Idgah , Badayun ; Jama Masjid , Badayun ; Hauz - i - Shamshi , Mehrauli ; Atarkin Darwaja , Nagaur [ inspiration of Buland Darwaja ( Akbar ) ] ; Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti Dargah , Ajmer . Balban ( 1266-87 ) The building built by Balban are- Tomb of Balban & Tomb of Khan Shaheed .
1. Tomb of Balban : Situated at Qila Rai Pithaura , built in 1287 ; first building in which true arch ( Mehrab ) was used , unfortunately the dome has not survived , the Alai Darwaja is the first building whose dome is survived .
...
1320-1414 .
With the rise of the Tughlaqs there were changes in th ideals and style of architecture . Dense decoration an luxurious splender were replaced by Islamic simplici and seriousness . Tughlaq style had some its own characteristic slopping / batted walls , octagonal tombs , fortifi
settlements etc.
Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq ( 1320-25 ) : Ghiyasuddin Tughl the founder of Tughlaq dynasty , was very fond architecture . He founded a new city Tughlaqah and built a tomb for himself i.e. Tomb of Ghiyasud Tughlaq . Join on Telegram @apna channels

1. Foundation of Tughlaqabad City ( 1321 ) : Situated east of Qutub region ; a fort was built in the city which is known as Chhappan Kot . Like pyramid of Egypt , its walls are inclined inwards . In other words , they are slopping walls which is speciality of Tughlaq buildings . General walls make 90 ° angle from the ground but walls of Tughlaq buildings make 75 ° angle from the ground .
2. Tomb of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq : Situated in the middle of a artificial lake inside Tughlaqabad city ; walls are inclined inwards ; Burj / Minar at every corner of tomb ; huge dome ( Gumbaj ) of tomb made up of marble .
3. Tomb of Shekh Ruknuddin Abul Fataeh ( Rukn - e- Alam ) : Located in Multan , Shekh Ruknuddin was a sufi saint patronised by Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq .
Quadrilateral Kale Khan Gumbai ( built by Mubarak Khan Lohani , 1481 Mubarakpur ) ; Bahlol Lodi Tomb ( built by Sikandar Lodi , 1489 , Chirag , Delhi ) , Shihabuddin Taj Khan / Bagh - i - Alam Gumbad ( 1501 Hauz Khas ) , Ibrahim Lodi Tomb ( Panipat , Haryana ) .
Tombs
Octagonal Tombs
Mubark Shah Tomb ( built by Mubark Shah , 1434 , Kotla Mubarakpur , Delhi ) ; Muhammad Shah Sayyed Tomb ( built by Alauddin Alam Shah , son of Muhammad Shah Savved , 1414 , Lodi Garden , Delhi ) ; Sikandar Lodi Tomb . ( built by Ibrahim Lodi , son of Sikandar Lodi , 1517-18 , Lodi Garden , Delhi ) ; Hasan Khan Sur Tomb ( built by Shershah , son of Hasan Khan , Sur , 1535 , Sasaram , Bihar ) ; Shershah Tomb ( began by Shershah Sur and completed by his son and successor Islam / Salim Shah Sur 1545 ; Sasaram , Bihar ) ; Islam / Salim Shah Sur Tomb ( began by Islam / Salim Shah Sur , but not ! completed due to his death in 1554 , Sasaram , Bihar ) ; Isha Khan Niyazi Tomb ( tomb of Isha Khan Niyazi , a minister ( Amir ) of Islam / Salim Shah Sur , 1547 , Nizamuddin , Delhi ) . Mosques ⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀ Bada Gumbad Masjid ( 1484-94 , Lodi Garden , Delhi ) ; Khairpur Masjid . ( Khairpur gaon , Mehrauli , Delhi ) ; Moth Masjid ( built by Miyan Bhuwa , a minister of Sikandar Lodi , 1505 , South Delhi ) ; Qila - i - Quhan / Purana Qila Masjid ( built by Shershan Sur , 1541 , Purana , Qila , Delhi ) . II . The Provincial Architecture . > Apart from Delhi , notable buildings were also built
Muhammad - bin-
Muhammad - bin - Tughlaq ( 1325-11 ) : Tughlaq was an ambitious and experimental Sultan . He built many buildings but most of them are ruined . The remains of construction work done by him are- Adilabad Fort , Jahanpanah City etc.
1. Adilabad Fort : Also known as Muhammadabad Fort , situated at North - East of Tughlaqabad City .
2. Jahanpanah City : Only two construction works © Satpula ( bridge ) and Vijay Mandal ( Palace ) are remained . Firoz Tughlaq ( 1351-88 ) : Firoz Tughlaq was a great builder . He founded many cities like Firozabad , Fatehabad , Hisar Firoza , Jaunpuretc.in which Firozabad City was the most notable . It is situated between mountainpart ( North ) and Hauz - i - Khas ( South ) of Delhi . The few famous buildings of the city are Jama Masjid ,
Kushk - i - Shikar palace , Kotla Firozabad ( palace ) etapna kirin the various provinces during Sultanate peciod i.e.
Two tombs built during Firoz Tughlaq's reign are- Tomb of Khan - i - Jahan Telangani ( 1370-71 ) and Tomb of Firoz Tughlaq ( 1388 ) . Tomb of Khan - i - Jahan Telangani ( 1370-71 ) : Jauna Shah , son of Malik Maqbul Khan - i - Jahan Telangani ( Wazir of Firoz Tughlaq ) , built the tomb in the memory of his father . This tomb was the first building of Delhi Sultanate which was based on octagonal ground - plan ( Ashtbujakar / Athpahlu adhar - ayojan ) . this tomb was the forerunner of tomb based on octagonal plan of Sayyed - Lodi period . Sayyed - Lodi Phase : 1414-1526 The fourth phase of development of Indo - Islamic culture completed during Sayyed and Lodi Sultans i.e. 1414-1526 . Sayyed Sultans ( 1414-50 ) : Sayyed Sultans founded two cities - Khizrabad ( by Khizr Khan ) and Mubarkabad ( by Mubarak Shah ) . Two tombs of Sayyed period are Tomb of Mubarak Shah and Tomb of Muhammad Shah Sayyed . These tombs were based on octagonal ground plan . Lodi Sultans ( 1451-1526 ) : Lodi Sultans built cities , tombs , mosques etc. They had more interest to build tombs ( Maqbaras ) , that's why Lodi period is known as period of tombs ( according to Percy Brown ) . City : The second Lodi Sultan Sikandar Lodi founded Agra City ( 1504 ) and shifted his Capital form Delhi to Agra . Tombs : Tombs of Lodi period are divided into two groups - Square - shaped / Quadrilateral Tombs ( Chaukor / Chaturbhuji Maqbaras ) & Octagonal Tombs ( Athpathu / Ashtbhuji Maqbaras ) .
1206-1526 .
Important Provincial Styles and their examples are as follows- Kashmir‍ Shah - i - Hamdani Masjid ( 1395 , built by Sultan ( 1003-1540 ) Sikandar ) ; Tomb of Jainulabidin's mother and Tomb of Madin Shan ( built by Jainulabidin ) . Mewar Annapurna Temple ( Chittor , built by Hammir ) ; ( 1326-1680 ) Pichhaula Lake ( Udaypur , builtby Laksh Singh ) ; Vijay Stambh ie . Tower of Victory , Kumbha Swami Temple , Chaturmukh Vihar Temple , 32 Forts of Mewar ( built by Rana Kumbha ) ; Rajsamand Lake ( built by Raj Singh ) .
Adina Masjid ( Pandua , built by Sikandar Shah 1368 ) ; Chhota Sona Masjid , Bara Sona Masjid & Kadam Rasul Masjid ( Gaur , built by Nusarat Shah ) ; Dakhil Darwaja ( 1459-74 , built by Barbak Shah ) . Firoz / Chirag Minar ( 1485-89 , built by Saifuddin Firoz ) . Atala Devi's Masjid ( built by Ibrahim Shah ( 1399-1484 ) Sharqi , 140S ) ; Jhanjhari i.e , perforated Masjid ( built by Ibrahim Shah Sharqi , 1430 ) ; Jami Masjid ( 1438-78 ) ; Lal Darwaja Masjid ( 1457 ) . Malwa Kamal Maula Masjid ( Dhar , 1400 ) ; Lal ( 1401-1562 ) Masjid ( Dhar , 1405 ) ; Dilawar Khan's Masjid ( Mandu . 1405 ) ; Jami Masjid ( Mandu , built by Sutan Hushang : 1405-35 ) ; Sultan Hushang Maqbara , Ashari Mahal . Hindola - Mahal ( looks like a railway bridge ) , Jahaz Mahal ( looks like a ship ) [ built by Baz Bahadur 1552-62 ] ; Tarkin . Dargali ( Nagaur , in the memory of Sufi Saint Shekh Hamiduddin Nagauri / Sultan - ul - Tarkin , a title given by his ( Nagaur )
Bengal ( 13-15-1576 )
Jaunpur
Join on Telegram @apna channels id Naru

3. Diversity in Design , Construction and Decoration The Mughals paid more attention to design , constructio and decoration than before . Mughals paid special attentio to plaster and stucco ( decorative coating applied on ceiling and walls of building ) . The Mughals used l'ictra Dura for first time in the decoration of buildings . The application & other coloured stone on white marble stone is called Piet Dura which is made in floral design and that applied the walls of buildings . In India Jahangir started Pietra Di that reached its climax in the time of his son and success . Shahjahan .
4. Harmony and balance between built and em spaces inbuildings : Mughal buildings are in perfect harmo with the natural surroundings . Multy level multy storey buildings were not constructed to give flat construction and vertical towers were kept to a minimum height . 5. Introduction of Char Bagh system : Mughals introduced the Char Bagh System , a special art of garde construction , in India . Char Bagh system was a Persian system . Char Bagh system were used in Mughal tombs , mausoleums . The quardilateral shaped Baghs are divided into four square parts which are symbolic representation of the four parts of heaven ( Jannat / Firdaus ) as mentioned in the Quran . The purpose of doing this was to try to give divine status to the deceased and his lineage . In the words of art - historian Percy Brown " The monument produced during the Mughal period maybe regarded as representing ' Indian summer ' of Moslez art and architecture . And it was a summer of more than ordinary brilliance and fertility " . In other words , the Tomb of Salabat Khan / Chand Bibi's Paapna_kiran . Mughal period was the most important period of ar
Gujarat Haibat Khan's Masjid ( Ahmedabad ) , Sayyed ( 1407-1573 ) Alam's Masjid & Jami Masjid ( built by . Ahmed Shah : 1411-12 ) ; Champaner , Junagarh & Kheda city ( founded by Mahmud Begarha : 1459-1511 ) ; Jami Masjid & Nagina Masjid ( Champaner , built by Mahmud Begarha ) ; Rauza of Rani Sipri / Sabrai ( Ahmedabad 1514 , built by Muzaffar Shah II : 1511-26 ) ; Sidi Sayyed Masjid ( 1515 , built by Muzaffar Shah II ) .
Vijayanagar Style ( 1336-1665 ) : Vithal Swami Temple & Hazarrama Temple ( Hampi ) ; Tadapatri & Parvati Temple ( Chidambaram ) ; Varadraja & Ekambarnath Temple ( Kanchi puram ) . Madurai Nayak Style ( 1529-1736 ) : Minakshi , Temple ( Madurai ) ; Rangnath Temple ( Srirangam ) . Bahniani Style ( 1347-1526 ) : Bala Hisar & Jami Masjid ( Gulbarga ) ; Sola Khamba Masjid ( Bidar ) ; Mahmud Gawan's Madrasa ( Bidar . 1472 , Mahmud Gawan prime minister of Bahmani Sultans ) . Adilshahi Style ( Bijapur ) : Jami Masjid ( Bijapur ) ; Gagan Mahal ( 1560 , built by Ali Adil Shah ) ; Ibrahim Rauza ( 1627 , built by Ibrahim Adil Shah ) ; Muhammad Adil Shah's Maqbara ( popularly known as Gol Gumbaj . 1656-60 , famous for whispering gallery ) . " . Nizam Shahi Style ( Ahmednagar ) Ahmednagar Fort , Qasim Khan's palace & Bagh - i - hast - bihisht ( built by Malik Ahmed Nizam Shah : 1490-1510 ) ;
Deccan Style
Qutub Shahi Style ( Golconda ) : Char , Minar ( 1591 , built by Quli Qutub Shah ) ; Muhammad Quli Qutub Shah's Maqbara ( 1625 ) . Barid Shahi Style ( Bidar ) : Amir Barid Shah's Maqbara ( Bidar )
and architecture .
Badshah's Contribution in Development of Architectur Babur : 1526-30 Babur was a cultured person with unmatched aesthet sense . Babur did not appreciate the buildings of the Turk - Afghan rulers of Sultanate period . In fact , t sent for the pupils of famous Albanian architect Sinan to work with the Indian craftsmen whose skill he had admired in the palaces of Man Singh and Vikramajite Gwalior . Babur was fond of building buildings , but time did no allow him much opportunity . > The Baghs ( gardens ) and Masjids ( mosques ) bu during his time are—–
Mughal Architecture .
Mughal architecture was the climax of Indo - Islamic architecture that began in the 13th century ( Sultanate period ) . According to Percy Brown , the reasons for all - round development of Mughal architecture were - aesthetic nature of Mughal rulers , personal interest of Mughal ( rulers , the wealth and power of the Empire , relatively settled conditions , intimate association between crown and craftsmen etc. Characteristic Features of Mughal Architecture Basic characteristic features of Mughal architecture are as follows- 1.1 . Construction of building on a large scale and use of superior material in building construction : Large surface areas were selected for Mughal building construction , which ranged from personal buildings to public buildings . Mughal used superior material in building - construction , for example , initially sand stone later marble , before Mughal : gravel ( a small piece of broken stone or brick ) was used etc.
2. Outlining & enactment in a planned manner : In the time of Mughal emperors , specially Akbar & Shahjahan , detail plans of buildings were made and every little step

1. Aaram Bagh of Agra ( 1528 , the oldest Mugo Bagh ) .
2. Panipat Bagh ( Panipat dist . , Haryana ) Masjids
1. Kabuli Bagh Masjid , Panipat ( 1527 , named ofte Babur's wife Kabuli Beglum , first Masjid bu by Mughals )
2. Jamali - Kamali Masjid Mehrauli ( began by Bab in 1528-29 and completed by Humayun in 155 named after Sufi poet & saint Shekh Faza Jamali and his brother Kamali . Humayun : 1530-40 , 1555-56 ... Humayun has inherited from his father Babur a taste
Baghs
The
struct Join on Telegram @aphanesime to devote hins
to pursi

1. Khair - ul - Manazil Masjid : 1561-62 , built by Maham Anaga
2. Adham Khan's Maqbara :
3. Humayun's Maqbara
1562 ; built by Akbar 1565-72 ; built by Bega " Beghum ( also known as Hazi Beghum )

4. Ataga Khan's Maqbara 1565-67 ; tomb of Ataga Khan , ( husband of Jiji Anaga )

2. Masjid at Fatehabad ( 1540 )
1. Humayun's Tomb : Located at Delhi , Year of construction : 1562-72 ; commissoned by Hamida Banu Beghum and built by Bega Beghum ( also known as Hazi Beghum ) ; . ⠀ Architect : Mirak Mirza Ghiyas ; an outstanding landmark in the development of the Mughal style ; specialities- ( a ) first Mughal tomb , first Indian tomb with Char Bagh system ( b ) first exampleofdoubledomein India first Mughal building in which white marble was used ( d )
( B ) Buildings of Agra Fort Agra fort was the first fort built by Akbar .
Tombs
Year of construction : 1564-80 .
It has 4 gates initially but later 2 gates had closed . Rest 2 gates are Delhi Dwar & Lahore Dwar . Delhi Dwar is also known as Hathiya Paur / Hathiya Pol because there were two statues of Hathi i.e. elephant were installed . Lahore Dwar is also known as Akbar Dwar because Akbar was the builder . Shahjahan renamed this dwar ' Amar Singh Dwar ' .
fine example of synthesis of Indian and Persian'apna_kiran .. architecture tradition ( e ) inspiration of Taj Mahal ( Tomb of Mumtazmahal & Shahjahan ) ( f ) later on in the premise of Humayun's tomb , Bega Beghum ( also khown as Hazi Beghum ) , Hamida Banu Beghum , Dara Shikoh , Jahandar Shah , Farrukhsiyar , Rafi - ud - Darzat , Rafi - ud- Daula , Alamghir - II were buried ( g ) This was the place where the last Mughal ruler Bahadur Shah Zafar ' hide during the revolt of 1857 and was captured and then sent to Rangoon
> According to Abul Fazal , Akbar built 500 buildings in Agra Fort . Few buildings of Agra Fort still remained- Akbari Mahal , Jahangiri Mahal etc.
1. Akbari Mahal : two storey building ; built in around 1569 .
2. Jahangiri Mahal : built in 1570 ; later Jahangir built . a bath - tub known as Hauz - i - Jahangir ( Jahangir's ) : tub ) , this bath - tub is monolithic and portable , at present it is fixed at main gate of Jahangiri Mahal ; " Jahangiri Mahal was inspired by Man Mandir . ( Man's palace ) of Gwalior . ( C ) Buildings of Fatehapuri Sikri Fort Originally Sikri was a village where Shekh Salim Chisti was born . Since Akbar got a son Salim ( later Jahangir ) at Sikri with the blessing of Salim Chisti therefore he thought Sikri · village was a luckycharm for him and decided to

2. Sufi Muhammad Gaus's Tomb , Hajira , _ Gwaliar ,: Tomb of Sufi Muhammad Gaus contemporary tomb of Humavun's tomb . Note : These tombs were concerned with Humayun but did not built during his time . Really these were built in the time of Akbar , therefore Akbar was called the Father of Mughal Maqbara system
Akbar : 1556-1605
Akbar had inherited from his father Humayun and grand father Babur a taste for fine arts . anket The order and prosperity of his long reign were important factors for the development of building construction . Abul Fazal has written that the emperor used to plan beautiful buildings and gave the form of stone and mortar to the thoughts of his mind and heart . Most of the buildings built under Akbar were made of red sandstone . That's why his age is known as Red Sandstone Age ' : White marble has also been used in- some places to enhance the beauty of the buildings . In the time of Akbar , the capital of Mughal empire was Delhi & Agra during 1556-64 , Ag during 1564-73 ,
a fort there .
Sikri fort was built during 1571-85 . Akbar shifted his capital from Agra to Sikri in 1573 . Şikri was renamed Fatehpur to commemorate Gujarat Fateh l.e. Gujarat victory by Akbar . That's why Sikri was called Fatehpur Sikri . Fatehpur Sikri was abondoned by Akbar in 1585. It is hard to decide whether he abondoned Sikri due to lack of water or moved to Lahore due to strategic reasons . The main buidings of Fatehpur fort ( from Buland Darwaja to inside buildings of Fort respectively ) are as follows- Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. So called Anarkali's Maqbara , Lahore It known as Anarkali's Maqbara but it is not the Maqbara of Anarkali ( so called beloved of Jahangir ) but Maqbara of Sahib - i - Jamal ( wife of Jahangir ) ; the story of Anarkali wa fabricated by English William Finch , Edward Terry etc. so that Mugal emperor can proved as a fallen person .
...

2. Jama Masjid : replica of Masjid of Mecca but fusion of Islamic and Hindu style ; Badshahi Darwaja at eastern part of Masjid ; Tomb of Shekh Salim Chisti and his grand son Islam Khan ( built by Jahangir in 1617 ) .
3. Maríam - uj - Jamani Mahal : The biggest palace of Sikri Fort ; residence of Mariam - uj - Jamani i.e. mother of world .
4. Birbal Mahal : Original name of Birbal — Mahesh Das , ajwel of Akbar's Ninejwels ( Navratna ) . 5. Mariam Palace : residence of Akbar's Goan wife Mariam . 6. Hawa Mahal ( Panch Mahal ) 5 - storey building ; inspired by Buddhist Vihara . 7.Tansen Mahal : Original Name of Tansen - Ramtanu Pandey , a jwel of Akbar's Ninejwels ( Navratna ) . 6. Other buildings : Turkey Sultana Mahal , Diwan - i- Khas , Diwan - i - Aam , Naubat Khan / Naqqarkhana , Khan Mahal , Ibadatkhana , Abul Faizi Mahal , Abul Fazal Mahal , Raja Todarmal Mahal , Shahi Ghursal , Shahi Ṭaksal , Shahi Khazana , Carvan Sarai , Hiran Minar , Naumahal , Aankh- Michaulí , Pachisi Prangan , Mina Bazar etc.
Shahjahan : 1628-58
> Shahjahanbrought Mughal architecture to its climax.For this reason , art - historian Percy Brown called the reig ☐☐ of Shahjahan ' the Golden Age of Mughal Architecture He was called ' Engineer King ' and ' Prince of Builder ' Chief characteristics of the Mughal architecture unde Shahjahanare - 1.Extensive use of marble - marblewas easily available from Makrana ( Jodhpur ) and Jaipur .
2. Use of square - shape base .
3. Use of squar structure ( dome etc. ) .
4. Dome like thin - necked onion . 5. Doub dome . 6. Foliated arches etc. > For the convenience of study , the buildings of Shahjaha period are divided into five groups
( A ) Buildings of Agra Fort
1. Khas Mahal : built for Beghums of harem .
2 .
Shish Mahal : on its inner walls glass inlay work has been done so that sparkles in any artificial light this palace was suitable for summer season .
3. Musamman Burj / Shah Burj / Chameli Mahal : 6 - storey building ; in this building Shahjahan spat the last 8 years ( 1658-66 ) of his life in captivity and ultimately died here .
Jahangir : 1605-28
Diwan - i - Aam Diwan - i - Khas
Jahangirhad more interest in painting than architecture .
4 .
The most significant feature of architecture of Jahangira Kiran Mahal of Agra period was Introduction of Pietra Dura . The use of Pietra Dura enhance the beauty of Mughal buildings . The Baghs and Maqbaras built during Jahangir's time
5 .
( B ) -
Meaning of Taj Mahal : Taj ( crown ) of Mahals ( building i.e. the best building . Year of construction : 1631-55 ( Total 22 years ) > Builder built by shahjahan in the memory of beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal ( Note : This building wa • definitely built in the memory of Mumtaz Mahal , buti has not been named after her name . See the differenc in spelling , Taj Mahal has letter ' J ' . but Mumtaz Mahd has letter ' Z ' . ) - Land : According to contemporary historian Abd Hamid and Mulla Muhammad Saleh , in exchan of this land Jai Singh ( grand son of Man Singh ) w given another land . The construction of Taj Mahal w started from the foundation . This is a lie or rumour the fact that it was originally a Hindu palace which w converted into a tomb / mausoleum by Shahjahan . Outlining and Construction : Outliner's name : Usta Ahmed Khan Lahori ; Builder's name - Ustad Ishakh material of construction : marble ; fine use of Pietra D Remarks : The Taj Mahal is the most famous . representative monument of the Mughal architec in India . Rabindra nath Tagore said about this : " TH an immortal poem of love and indelible tear - drop the beloved's vow on the cheek of eternity " . UNESO included it in the World Heritage site in 1983 ( C ) . Buildings of Red Fort ( Lal Qila ) , Delhi Shahjahan founded a new city Shahjahanabad Join on Telegram @apna_channels
are-
Baghs 1 Shalimar Bagh , Srinagar : built in 1619 . ( Gardens ) 2 Dilkasha Bagh , Shahdara , Lahore ; originally built by Akbar , enlarged by Jahangir , in this Bagh Jahangir , Nurjahan & Asaf Khan ( Nurjahan's brother ) are buned .
Akbare Magbara , Sikandara , Agra began by Akbar and completed by Jahangir in 1613 , fusion of Islamic , Hindu , Buddhist & Christian styles . 2 Mariam - uj - Jamani's Maqbara , Sikandara , Agra built by Jahangir in the memory of his mother Mariam - uj - Jamani .
3. Ilmad - ud - Daula's Magbara , Ara year of Construction ; 1622-23 ; built by Nurjahan in the memory of his mother ( Asmat Beghum ) and father ( Mirza Ghiyas Beg whose tille was 3limad - ud - Daula ) , first Mughal building to be constructed wholly out of marble and first Mughal building in which Pietra Dura was used ; this Maqbara is also known as " Laghu Taj ( small Taj or Bachcha Taj ( child Taj ) Abdurahim Khan - i - khana's Magbara , Delhi built by Abdurrahim Khan - khana , a jwel of Akbar's Nine jwels ( Navratna ) ; graves of Abdurrahim Khan - i - Khana and his wife

7. Shalimar Bagh / Aizzabad Aizzabad Bagh at Delhi ( 1642 ) 8. Hayatbaksh Bagh at Red Fort , Shahjahan Delhi-
Beghum
Shahjahan builts Diwan - i - Aam , Shah Burj , Sheesh Burj , Naulakha Mahal , Khwabgah in Lahore Fort .... Shahjahan builts Asaf Khan's Maqbara at Shahdara in
( Shahjahan's wife )
Lahore . Asif khan was the Prime Minister of Shahjahanpna Agra ( not survived at present }
Maahtab Bagh at the bank of Shahjahan Yamuna behind Taj Mahal ,
9 .
Aurangzeb ( 1658-1707 ) and After The Mughal architecture began to deteriorate after the death of Shahjahan .
Dara Shikoh

10. Wazir Bagh at Kashmir
11 Mughal Bagh at Pinjore , Muzaffar Hussain Koka Haryana
alias Nawab Fidai Khan Koka ( Aurangzeb's acousin brother ) Chaharburji Bagh at Lahore Jebunnisa ( Aurangzeb's daughter ) Modem India Architecture
His son and successor Aurangzeb had little interest in architecture and secondly , his life was spent in constant . wars and troubles ( especially economic ) , due to this a very few buildings were built during his reign . The buildings built during Aurangzeb's time are - Moti Masjid at Red Fort ( 1662 ) ; Bibi's Maqbara / Rabia - ud- Durrani's Maqbara at Aurangabad in Maharashtra ( 1668-78 ) ; Badshahi Masjid at Lahore in Pakistan ( 1674 ) ; Aurangzeb's Maqbara at Shekh Jainuddin ( spiritual guru of Aurangzeb ) Dargah campus ( 1707 ) etc. Bibi's Maqbara / Rabia - ud - Durrani's Aurangabad , Maharashtra : ( a ) Aurangzeb decided to build a Maqbara ( Tomb / Mausoleum ) in memory of his first and beloved wife Dilras Banu Beghum who died in 1657 and later given the title of Rabia - ud - Durrani i.e. Rabia of that time ) ( b ) Aurangzeb gave approval to build this Maqbara in 1660. The work of construction of Maqbara was entrusted to Attaullah Khan ( son of Ustad Ahmed Khan Lahori , architect of Taj Mahal ) who built in 10 years ( 1668-78 ) ( c ) This Maqbara was built on the pattern of Taj Mahal . First , it is half the size of Taj Mahal and secondly , it is made of black marbles . That's why it hasn't been made appropriate and it has become a poor imitation of Taj Mahal . , ( d ) Due to its location in the Deccun , it is called ' Taj of Deccan ' and being made in low budgety it is called " Poor Faife ) The official
The British became powerful during the decline of the Mughals . The British ruled India from 1757 to 1947 . The important buildings built during British rule are given in the table below-
Maqbara ,
Architectural Specimens Mumbai University ( 1878 ) , Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus CST ( 1887 ) , Gateway of India [ 1924 , to commemorate India arrival ( 1911 ) of King George V ] Fort Saint George ( 1641 ) Chepauk Palace ( 1768 ) ; Chennai Railway Station ( 1873 ) ; Madras University ( 1857 ) , General Post Office ( 1884 ) , Rippon Bhawan ( 1913 ) Fort William ( 1702 ) Writers ' Building ( 1777 ) Government House ( 1803 , now known as Raj Bhawan ) , Town Hall ( 1813 ) ; Indian Museum ( 1814 ) National Library ( 1836 ) Howrah Railway Station ( 1854 ) ; Calcutta High Court ( 1862 ) ; GPO ( 1868 ) Victoria Memorial ( 1921 ) etc. " Join on oh Telegram @apna_channels
Centre Bombay ( Mumbai )
Madras ( Chennai )
Calcutta ( Kolkata )
***

2. Sculpture
The art of sculpt ( i.e. making objects from metal , stone , wood , clay etc. ) is called ' Sculpture " The study of icon ie images / statues is known as Iconography .. In India , the story of sculpture begins with Harappan civilization .
Harappan Sculpture
The important statues / figures of Harappan sculpture
National Emblem
are
The capital part of lion capital of Sarnath originally cons
Mohenjodaro : Dancing girl , standing woman , buffallo , ram etc. Harappa Bullock cart , one - bull cart , dog attacking deer etc. Chanhudaro : Bullock cart , one - bull cart etc. Lothal Ox , dog rabbit , bird etc.
Metal
4 component parts a lotus bell base ,
Figures
an abacus on the bell base with 4 chakras ( wheels ) & 4 animals [ Bull & Horse ( visible ) ; Lion & Elephant ] ( invisible ) ] proceeding clockwise , above the abacus figures of 4 lions
Kalibangan : Bull etc
BEGR
Mohenjodaro : Priest / Beared man , male statue ,
Stone Statues
back to back facing 4 cardinal di- Pillar Capital Emblem
Fran
etc
rections ;
the crowning element , Chakra , a large wheel , was also a part of this pillar ( which is in broken condition now and kept in Sarnath museum ) Mätridevi i.e. Mother Goddess ) , animals birda kira Two parts of capital - the lotus base ( bottom part ) and
Harappa Male torso , male dancer . Terracottas Subject of terracottas Man - woman ( viz .
( víz . Bull , Buffalo , Duck , Peacock ) . * The bronze figure of a dancing girl ( Mohenjodaro ) indicates that Harappan people know the art of bronze casting in CIRE PERDUE 1.e. lost wax process . ( In this process a figure is first made in wax which is then covered with a coating of clay , which then dry is heated to run out the war . The hollow thus created is filled with molten metal which takes the shape of the original object ) .
crowning wheel ( top part ) has been rejected and two parts of capital the abacus and figures of 4 lions ( middle parts ) has been selectd for the National Emblem . Also a line Satyameva Jayate - truth alone triumphs has been taken from Mundak Upanishad and placed below the abacus It is called National Motto : In this way , two parts of Sarnath line capital ( abacus & lions ) and one line Satyameva Jayate from Mundak Upanishad make Nationa Emblem of India . This National Emblem was adopted on 26 January 1950 . These pillars were placed either in sacred enclosures or in the vincinity of towns . Construction of pillars were made mostly by brown sand stone mined from Chunar ( Mirzapur dist . , U.P. ) . Only few pillars were constructed by red and white sand stone mined from Mathura .
Mauryan Sculpture
The specimens of Mauryan sculpture are found in the forms of pillars , stone statues and terracottas .
Pillars / Ashokan Pillars
The best example of Mauryan art is monolithic pillar , also known as Ashokan pillar / Ashok's Lat , on the top of which the animal figure is joined . These pillars are admired throughout the world for their wonderful polish and animal figures . The number of Ashokan pillars would have been 30 , out of which 15 are remained and 15 have been ruined . These pillars of two types - with inscription & without inscription . Pillars with Inscriptions - Meerut - Delhi , Topara- Delhi , Allahabad , Laurianandangarh , Lauriaareraj ,. Sanchi , Samath , Rummindei , Nigali sagar ( Nigliva ) . Pillars without Inscriptions Rampurva , Kosambi , Basarh etc. Parts of Pillars The pillar has two parts - Tapering Shaft & Capital .

2. Stone Statues
☑The Mauryan stone statues are found in the , form of Yaksha - Yakshini statues . Yaksha - a demi - god . protector of nature , Yakshini - a demi - goddess protector of nature , Finding places of Yaksha - Yakshini statues : Kuru . kshetra , Mehrauli , Besnagar , Vidisha , Mathura , Varanasi , Patna , Sishupalgarh ( Odisha ) etc. in which notable statues . are - Yaksha ( ' Manibhadra ) of Parkham village ( Mathura ) , Timukha Yaksha . ( Varanasi ) , Yakshini / Yakshi of Besnagar ( Vidisha M.P. ) , Chanwarbeerer Yakshini of Didarganj ( Patn³ .
Bihar ) .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2. Shavite : Shaivite statues were made in Gupta period . The statue of Ardhanarishwar ( half male - half female ) form was first made in this period . The one - faced ( Ekmukhi ) and four - faced ( Chaturmukhi ) Linga of Shiva was first made during this period . Ekmukhi Shiv linga idol was found in Bhumara and Khoh and Chaturmukhi Shivlinga was found in Karamdanda ( Faizabad ) . Such idols of Shiva are known ´as Mukhlinga . The construction of Mukhlingas is attractive and artful . Statues concerned with Buddhist religion The Buddha statues made in Gupta period are free from the influence of Gandhar style . > The Halo of Buddha statues of Kushana period was plain while the Halo of Buddha statues of Gupta period was ornated . Among Buddha statues of Gupta age , three famous
The subject matter of Mathura style is - Buddha and Bodhisatva , Jain Teerthankaras and Hindu deities . This was due to Mathura was the common centre of Buddhist , Jain and Brahmanic ( Hindu ) religion . Apart from these religious statues , statues of contemporary rulers were also made in Mathura style . ·· Statues concerned with Buddhist religion : Statues of Buddha are found in two forms - Yakshmurti ( statues in standing position ) and Yogimurti ( statues in sitting position ) . Statues concerned with Jain religion : Jain statues of Teerthankaras & others are of two types - Kayotsarg mudra ( statues in standing position ) & Padmasan mudra ( statues in sitting position ) . Aayagpatt i.e. votive stone slabs which is established in Jain temple for offering and the worship of Teerthankaras . Aayagpatt is a special form of Mathura scutplure style . Kankali Tila near Mathura was a Jain site . Most of the Jain statues are found from Kankali Tila . Statues concerned with Brahmanic ( Hindu ) religion : Notable statues of Hindu deity- ( a ) Vaishnavite : Vishunu , Luxmi , Panch Vrishniveer , Sankarshan , Balram etc ... ( b ) Shaivite : Shiva , Parvati , Ganesh , Kartikeya ( Skand ) , Nag etc. ( c ) Others : Brahma , Surya , Kuber , Gajluxmi , Sapt- Matrika , Katyayani , Mahisasurmardini , Vasundhara , Agni , Yaksha , Ayudhpurush etc. Statues concerned with rulers : Chastan ( Saka ) , Vim Kadphisas ( Kushana ) , Kanishka ( Kushana ) . Among these
statues are

1. Stone statue of Buddha found from Mathura ( at present in Mathura Museum ) , ...
2. Stone statue of Buddha found from Sarnath ( at present in Sarnath museum ) , and
3. Copper statue of Buddha found from Sultanganj , Bihar ( at present in Birminghum museum , England ) . Medieval Sculpture
I. North India .
> Pala & Sen Sculpture ( Eastern Style Sculpture ) : Under the Pala and Sen kings of Bengal & Bihar ( 8th - 12th century ) both Buddhists and Hindus made fine icons , statues , the headless statue of Kanishka is remarkable @ apna_kirmany in the black basalt . The special characteristic of
is in standing posture . In this statue , Kanishka is depicted * in military attire . He is wearing a knee - length coat . He has full boots on his feet , right hand rests on mace and left hand holds the hilt of a sword . From the point of view of art , statue is of high quality . Overall , due to it's originality , beauty and creative diversity and multitude of creation , Mathura art has a distinct place in Indian art . Gandhar style was realistic ( materialistic & rationalist ) , while Mathura style was idealistic ( spiritual & emotionalist ) . Mathura style is " almost free from foreign influence and it has carried forward earlier Sanchi - Bharhut style of Indian art style .
Pala sculpture is its fine finish ; its statues are much decorated and well polished and often seem rather made of metal than of stone . Odisha Sculpture The carving of the temples of Bhubaneshwar and Konark shows a deep sensuous appreciation of the human form . The finest Odishan sculptures are those in the courtyard of the temple of Sun ( Surya ) at Konark , where the forceful horses and the mighty elephant crusing a male factor in his trunk show a strength of treatment . Chandela ( Khajuraho ) Sculpture : The Khajuraho temples are covered with figures of divinities and lovers of wonderful delicacy and grace . Solanki ( Gujarat - Rajasthan ) Sculpture : Under the Solanki ruler of Gujarat and Rajasthan ( 10th - 12th century ) Jain made fine icons , mostly in white marble . Specimens of Solanki sculpture are found in Mount Abu , Girnar , Palitana etc.
Gupta Sculpture
Indian sculpture developed greatly during the Gupta period . Gupta sculpture art is known as Classical Art ' . Statues of Gupta period are concerned with Brahmanic ( Hindu ) & Buddhist religion . Statues concerned with Brahmanic ( Hindu ) religion Brahmanic statues are categorized into 2 category- 1 Vaishnavite Gupta rulers were supporters of Vaishnavism . Hence numerous statues of Lord Vishnu were made during their time . Vishnu idols of Gupta period are four - armed ( Chaturbhuji ) . Vishnu idols of Mathura , Eran and Deogarh are notable . In which Vishnu idols of Dasawatar temple ( Deogarh ) are the most famous . Statues . that depicted Varah incarnation of Vishnu were made in this period . A giant Varah idol was made at Varah cave
II . South India ☑Chalukya Sculpture : The temples of Aihole , Badami and Pattadakal contain fine worth of Chalukyan , sculpture , which shows the influence of the Gupta style : with a tendency to elongation perhaps inherited from Amaravati style . Pallava Sculpture : Pallava rulers of Kanchi had keen interest in sculpture . The depicting of the body of gods and humans is more graceful in Pallava sculptur and the depiction of animals in Pallava sculpture is
x .
temple of Udaygu ①Vinh on is Telegram @apna channelsmost remarkabl
earth with his teeth .
specimens are the sculptures of Mammalapurum

3. Painting
Introduction "
The art of paint is known as Painting .
Among three forms of art ( architecture , sculpture & painting ) , painting is the easiest , that's why man first started his art journey with it . In India , story of painting begins with prehistoric period . Indian painting is mainly found in 4 forms— Wall Painting / Mural ( Bhitti Chitra ) : Painting on walls or ceilings . Canvas Painting / Roll - Painting ( Chitrapata ) : Painting on canvas made up of cloth or leather ; rollable . Board Painting ( Chitraphalaka Chitrakala ) : Painting on board made up of wood , stone or metal . Miniature Painting ( Laghuchitra Chitrakala ) : Mini / small size painting on pieces of paper , book pages or cloth . Ancient Painting
.at Raisen district in Madhya Pradesh ; caves of Bhimbetka were discovered in 1957-58 by Vishnu sridhar ( V.S. ) Wakankar , an eminent . archaeologist ; having about 800 rock shelters , 500 of Hunting Scenes ( Bhimbetka ) which bear paintings ; it has oldest known rock paintings in India ; themes of painting- hunting , animal fighting , horse & elephant riders , honey collection , dancing , music , decoration of bodies and other household scenes ; painters used many colours but white and red were their favourite colours ( white colour - made outd limestone & green colour - made out of chalcedony ) ; listed in UNESCO World Heritage site in 2003 .
Jogimara Nested in Ramgarh hills in Puta village i Sarguja district of Chhattisgarh ; date 3rd century BC 2nd century BC ; 8 panels of mural ; themes of paintings humans , animals etc. Ajanta : Located at Ajanta village in Aurangabad district of Maharashtra ; rock - cut caves carved out of the slope of a high hill located in Baghora river valley in horse - shoe shape ; among 29 caves , cave number 16 & 17 are of Gupta period ; "
When the basic need of food , clothing and shelter were fulfilled prehistoric primitive people felt the need to express themselves . Painting was the oldest art form practised by human beings to express themselves , using cave walls as their canvas . These paintings on cave walls are known as Rock paintings .: The first discovery of rock paintings at Sohagighat in the sandstone hills of Vindhya ( Mirzapur dist . , U.P. ) was made in India in 1867-78 by an archaeologist , Archibold Carlleyle . John Cockburn , C.W. Anderson , Rajendralal Mitra and Manornjan Ghosh were the early archaeologists who discoved a large number of sites in
the Indian leonnten on Telegram @apna channelshul & Yashodhi

5. In paintings of Rajput style often a single painter completed one painting , while that of Mughal Pha : style generally at least four painters completed one painting ... 6 : Rajput painting style was spiritual and idealistic art form while Mughal painting style was materialistic and realistic art form . Time period of Rajput painting style was 16th - 19th century , while that of Mughal painting style was 16th - 18th century . Modern India Painting Company Style : 1757-1858 The traditional Indian painting declined and received a setback with the establishment of the British East India Company rule . The company rule established in 1757 and ended in 1858 . The European oil painting took the place of murals ( wall paintings ) and miniatures . With the colonial rule , the English were charmed by different manners and customs of people of all ranks , tropical flora and fauna and varying locals . Partly for documentation and partly for artistic reasons , many English officers of East India Company commissioned local artists to paint scenes around them to get a better idea of the natives . The painters were largely made on paper by local artists , some of whom had migrated from erstwhile courts of Delhi , Lucknow or Murshidabad .
Raja Ravi Varma , coming from the princely family of Travancore , with a profound knowledge of Sanskrit , produced ata rapid pace an amazing number of pictures illustrating every possible text in Sanskrit , revealing his eminence as a portrait - painter . He depicted scenes from popular epics like Ramayana and Mahabharata . They became so popular that many of his paintings were copied as oleograph ( photographs produced by printing press ) and were sold in market . They even entered people's homes as calendar images . Raja Ravi Varma revered as ' the Father of Calendar Art in India . Notable Paintings : Rama Vanquishing the pride of the Ocean ' , ' Krishna as envoy " " Shakuntala patra - lekhan ' , Hans Damyanti , Nair Lady , etc. With the rise of nationalism in India by the end of nineteenth century , this academic style embraced by Ravi Varma came to be looked down upon as foreign and too wastern to show Indian myths and history . Bengal School , Under the inspiration of E.B. Havell : 1861-1934 ( the Principal of Government School of Art , Calcutta ) and leadership of Abanindra Nath Tagore : 1871-1951 ( the Vice - Principal of Government School of Art , Calcutta ) a new phase of Indian art began which was known as To please theiŒÏArneyTelagnam @apha channels
Join on

11. Vijaya Dasami
Sathiya ( Partner )
Gujarat
Aripan
Bihar
Aipan
Uttarakhand
Muggu
Andhra Pradesh Rajasthan
12 Karva Chauth
Mandana

4. Festivals and Fairs
Festivals are an integral part of Indian life . The diversity of Indian society has resulted in a variety of festivals . The different religious communities like Hindus , Muslims , Christians , Sikhs , Jain , Buddhist etc. have their own festivals . Different regions of India like Kashmir , Punjab , Delhi , U.P. , Bihar , Assam , Bengal , Tamil Nadu , Kerala , Goa etc. have their own festivals . Further , some secular festivals of all - India importance have also come into existence which is known as National Festivals . National festivals of India are— Republic Day ( 26 January ) , Independence Day × ( 15 August ) and Gandhi Jayanti ( 2 October ) . ' Hindu Festivelas

13. Deepawali / Deewali
14Chhath
kla Paksha of Magh month ( Festival of worship of goddess Saraswati , goddess of art & learning ) On the Chaturdashi of Krishna Paksha of Fagun month ( on the occasion of Shiva - Parvati marriage ) : On the Purnima of Fagun month ( on the occasion of Holika's burning and Prahalad's survival , It symbolizes the victory of good over evil , festival of Abir / Gulal ( powder ) & Rang ( colour ) ]
16 .
Name of the Festival Shitala Ashtami
Date ( Occasion ) .
On the Ashtami of Krishna Paksha of Chait month ( celebrated by women in the honour of Shitala Mata , the goddess of chechak i.e. smallpox ) On the Navami of Shukla Paksha of Chait month ( on the occasion of Lord Ram's birth Ram's birth anniversary ) mis
Shivaratri
Ramnavami

18. Holi
Hanuman Jayanti On the Purnima of Chait month ( on the occasion of Lord Hanuman's birth
fanniversary
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

17.Mizoram
Nagaland
died

19.Odisha
on the same day of Baishakh Purnimal
Punjab
Regional Festivals and fairs

1. Andhra Pradesh : Ugadi , Tirupati festival . 12 Arunachal
Mopin of the Galos , Solung of the Adis , LosaroftheMonpas , Dree of the Apatanis , Si - Donyi of the Tagnis , Nyokum of Nyishis , Reh of the Idu Mishmis Bihu ( Rongali Bihu / Bohag Bihu , Bhogali Bihu / Magh Bihu & Kangali Bihu / Kati Bihu ) , Kherai Puja ( puja of Bodos ) , Bathów ( puja of Bodos ) , Ambubachi fair
21 : Rajasthan
Pradesh
Assam
Losar , Losung / Namsung ( new year Saga dawa ( Buddha's birth anniversary 2 Tamil Nadu Pongal , Puthandu , Natyanjali dance festival , Thaipusam Jallikattu Bull festival
22 Sikkim
Chhath puja , Janaki Navami , Sonepur cattle fair ( Harihar kshetra mela ) , Sitamarhi cattle fair Hareli , Larukaj , Kaksar , Bambleshwari fair , Danteshwari fair Zatra at Cansaulim , Feast of St. Francis Xavier , Carnival , Chikal kalo ( Monsoon mud festival
Bihar .
Bonalu , Batu kamma Karchi Puja . Ker Puja Tripureshwar Temple festival

24. Telangana 23. Tripura

5. Chhattisgarh
Kumbh Mela ( Haridwar ) , Devidhura Mela ( Champavat ) , Purnagiri Mela ( Champavat ) , Nanda Devi

26.Uttarakhand :
16 Goa
Mela
( Almora ) , Gauchar Mela ( Chamoli ) , Uttaraini Mela ( Bageshwar )
Garba ,
Dandia ,
Ranotsav - Kutchh

7.Gujarat
carnival , Tarnetar fair , Madhavrai fair , Ambaji fair , Janmashtami , Dang Darbar ,
Kumbh Mela ( Prayagraj ) , Cattle fair ( Bateswar ) , Nauchandi , Mela ( Meerut ) ) Garh Mukteshwar Mela Durga Puja , Ganga Sagar Yatral Ramkrishna Utsav , Dol Purnima

27. Uttar Pradesh
Shamlaji fair , Bhavnath fair , Chitra pna kiran
vichitra fair
Geeta Mahotsav , Surajkund craft fair Faridabad ( i.e. please save us ) . , . 9.Himachal Pradesh Minjar Mela , Jwalamukhi : fair , Kullu

28. West Bengal

8. Haryana
Different Names of New Year
Dushera
First January Prathama Chaitra Pahli tareekh Muharram
Chrishan Calendar

10. Jharkhand $ 117Karnataka
Karma , Sarhul , Tusu or Makar Ugadi , Mahamastakabhisheka ( held once every 12 years )
Hindu Calendar Muslim Calendar Persian / Iranian Calendar Maharashtra , Goa ( Marathis ) Kerala , Tamil Nadu ( Malayalis ) Assam ( Assamese )
Nauroz / Nowruz Gudi Padwa
Onam , Thrissur Pooram , Attukal Pongala , Aranmula boat race 13.Madhya Pradesh Teej , Gangaur , Khajuraho dance festival , Malwa festival 14 Maharashtra Ganpati puja , Gudi Padwa , Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Jayanti
12 Kerala
Vishu / Kollam
Bohag Bihu
Andhra Pradesh , ( Telugu ) Punjab ( Sikhs )
Ugadi
Karnataka
Baisakhi

15. Manipur
Lai Haraoba , Cheiraoba , Ningol Chak- Kouba , Imoinu Iratpa , Gaan - Ngai , Lui- Ngai , Sangai , Mera Houchongba 16. Meghalaya Pomblang Nongkrem ( Khasis ) , Ka Shad Suk Mynsiem ( Khasis ) , Beh Dienkhlam ( Jaintias ) , Wangala ( Garos )
Pohela Boishakh / Naba Bengal ( Bengalis ) . Barsha
Tamil Nadu ( Tamilian )
Puthandu
Gujarat ( Gujaratis ) Odisha ( Odiyas ) .
Bestu Varas
Pana Sankranti
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Unit and Dimension Eni The chosen standard used for measuring physical quantity is called unit .
Time Tropical year = It is the year in which total solar eclips occurs . Leap year It is the year in which the month of Februar is of 29 days . Astronomical distances are measured in light year , because speed of light is always the same . NTU ( Nephelometric Turbidity Unit ) = measures , lurbidility of fluid ( presence of suspended particle in water ) Prefixes used in metric system . Prefix Symbol Multiplier Prefix Symbol Multiplier
Unit should be :
1 .
well defined
casy to reproduce easy to compare internationally accepted 5. independent of changes in physical conditions Units are of two types :
1. Fundamental Unit and

2. Derived Unit
System of Units : Units depend on choice . Each choice of units leads to a new system ( set ) of units . The internationally accepted systems are
1. CGS system
2. MKS System
3. FPS System
4. SI Units . : In SI Units , there are seven fundamental units given in the following table :
10-
deca
deci Scenti
heclo
102
107
10-3
milli
103
106
micro
10 %
10-9
10 %
nano
10-12
SI Unit Symbol
Physical Quantity
T :

10.3
bico
femto
10-15
Length
metre .
10-18
atto
exa ,
Mass
kilogram :
Z1021
10:21
zepto
zetta
Time
second
@apna
1024
( vocto
yotta
Electric Current
anipere .
Dimension
Temperature
kelvin
Dimension of a physical quantity are the power through which different fundamental quantities are raised . to define the quantity . The expression by which a physical quantity is defined . in terms of fundamental quantities is called dimensional formula of the quantity . For example : Dimensional formula of momentum is |
Luminous intensity
candela
Amount of substance
mole
mol
Besides these seven fundamental supplementary units are also defined , viz . , radian [ rad ] for plane angle and steradian ( sr ) for solid angle . All the units which are defined / expressed in terms of fundamental units are called derived units . Some important derived units S Physical Quantity cas units Sl unit 1 For
units , two
MLT - 1
_ Quantity
Dimensional Formuli , IM'L³Tº1 :
Relation
1 , Volume :
dyne newton 1 newton = 10 ° dyne
[ ML³Tº ]

2. Density
[ M ° L¹T´¹ ]

3. Velocity
erg
joule 1 joule 10 erg ,
[ M ° LIT

4. Acceleration
Some practical units of length , mass and time
IM LOT 11

5. Angular Velocity , Frequency
Light year = distance travelled by light in one year in Vacuum ,
[ MLT ] ]
6 Momentum , Impulse .
1LY = 946 » 105m
7 Force
[ MLT = 2 ]
Astronomical Unit ( AU ) = 1.5 x 10 m Parse 3.26 lv = 3.08 × 10 ! " m Nautici mile or Seamile = 6076 ft = 1852 m 1 Micum = 10 % 1 Angs ron ( A ) = 100 m

8. Work , Energy
[ ML2T2 ]
Len
[ ML2T3 ]

9. Power

10. Pressure , Streess , Modulus of Elasticity [ MLT ? ]
[ MLT " ]

11. Moment of Inertia

12. Torque / Moment of For
[ ML ? T } ] ]
1 Quintal = 10² kg :
13 , Angular Momentum , Planck's Constent [ ML ? T ] ]
1 Metric ton = 10 kg
[ MLT ! ]

14. Coefficient of Viscosity .
1 Atomic Mass Unit ( amu ) or Dalton = 1.6610kg

15. Surface Tension
[ M'L'T
Mass Slug = 14.59 kg 1 Pound 0.4537 kg
[ ML³T :

16. Universal Gravitational Constant
[ M ° L ? T = ]
17 , Latent Heat
1 Chandrashekhar limit = 1 : 4 times the mass of
[ M ° I ? T =
18 Specific Heat

2.8 x 10
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2. Motion
time to reach maximum height = v18 time of flight = 2v / 8 maximum height = v² / 2g
Scalar Quantities : Physical quantities which have magnitude only and no direction are called scalar quantities . Example : Mass , speed , volume , work , time , power , energy etc. Vector Quantities ; Physical quantities which have magnitude and direction both and obey triangle law are called vector quantities . Example : Displacement , velocity , acceleration , force , momentum , torque etc.
Circular Motion : If an object describes a circular path ( circle ) its motion is called circular motion . If the object moves with uniform speed , its motion is uniform circular motion .
Uniform circular motion is an accelerated motion because the direction of velocity changes continuously , though the magnitude of velocity ie speed of the body remains unchanged . Angular Velocity The angle subtended by the line joining the object from the origin of circle in unit time interval is called angular velocity : It is generally denoted by wand w = If T - time period = time taken by the object to complete one revolution , n = frequency = no . of revolutions in one second .
Electric current , though has a direction , is a scalar quantity because it does not obey triangle law . Note : Moment of inertia , refractive index , stress are tensor quantities . Distance : Distance is the length of actual path covered by a moving object in a given time interval . Displacement : Shortest distance covered by a body in a definite direction is called displacement . Distance is a scalar quantity whereas displacement is a vector quantity both having the same unit ( metre ) . Displacement may be positive , negative or zero whereas distance is always positive . In general , magnitude of displacements distance Speed : Distance travelled by the moving object in unit * Distance time interval is called speed i.e. speed =
then nT = 1 ] and w
• 2
T In one revolution ; the object travels 2ar distance . 2xr T Linear speed = wr = angular speed x radius . Newton's laws of motion : Newton , the father of physics established the laws of motion in his book " principia " in 1687 . Newton's first law of motion : Every body maintains its initial state of rest or motion with uniform speed on a straight line unless an external force acts on it . @apna_kiranfirst law is also called law of Galileo or law of inertia .
Time
· It is a scalar quantity and its SI unit is metre / second ( m / s ) .. : If an object covers half of the distance with uniform speed v , and the other half with uniform speed 2 . Then the average speed of object is
Velocity : Velocity of a moving object is defined as the displacement of the object in unit time interval i.e. velocity Displacement Time It is a vector quantity and its SI unit is metre / second . ' Acceleration : Acceleration of an object is defined as the rate of change of velocity of the object i.e. acceleration . Change in Velocity
Inertia : Inertia is the property of a body by virtue of which the body opposes change in its initial state of rest or motion with uniform speed on a straight line . Inertia is of two types
1. Inertia of rest
2. Inertia of motion Some examples of Inertia / first Law :
1. When a car or train starts suddenly , the passengers bend backward ..
2. When a running horse stops suddenly , the rider bends forward .
3. When a coat / blanket is beaten by a stick , the dust particles are removed . First law gives the definition of force . Force : Force is that external cause which when acts on a body changes or tries to change the initial state of rest or motion with uniform velocity of the body . Push , Pull , tension in a string , tension in a coiled spring , action , reaction , normal reaction , friction are forces ; Momentum : Momentum is the measure of amount / quantity of motion contained in body . Clearly it is the property of a moving body and is defined as the product of mass and velocity of the body . i.e. momentum = mass x velocity . It is a vector quantity . Its SI unit is kgm / s . Newton's second law of motion . The rate of change in momentum of a body is directly proportional to the applied force on the body and takes place in the direction of force . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Time
It is a vector quantity and its SI units is metre / second² ( m / s² ) If velocity decreases with time then acceleration is negative and is called retardation .
Equation of motion in one dimension
1. Motion with uniform velocity .
s = ' ut

2. Motion with uniform acceleration
≥ at² = ( “ ± v ) ; v² = i² + 20s In case of motion with uniform acceleration
ut + ½ ( " +
V = u + at
$ =
= 1 + 208
11 + : 01
average velocity =
2 .
1 = initial velocity
v = final velocity
a = acceleration
= time

5. = distance in straight line / displacement Motion under gravity . If a body is projected up with a
velocity v , then

1. Stable Equilibrium : If on slight displacement fros equilibrium position ; a body has tendency to regain original position , it is said to be in stable equilibrium . Join on Telegram @apna channels

2. Unstable equilibrium : If on slight displacement from equilibrium position , a body moves in the direction of displacement and does not regain its original position , the equilibrium is said to unstable equilibrium . In this equilibrium , the centre of gravity of the body is at the highest · position .
If two bodies have same kinetic energy , then body with larger mass will have higher momentum . Principle of Conservation of Energy Energy can neither be created nor can be destroyed . Only energy can be transformed from one form to another form . Whenever energy is utilized in one form , equal amount of energy is produced in other form . Hence total energy of the universe always remains the same . This is called the principle of conservation of energy . > When a ball is thrown vertically upward its potential energy increases , kinetic energy decreases but the total energy remains constant Some Equipments used to Transform Energy S. Equipment Energy Transformed

3. Neutral Equilibrium : If on slight displacement from ¨equilibrium position a body has no tendency to come back to . its original position or to move in the direction of displacement , it is said to be in neutral equilibrium . In neutral equilibrium , the centre of gravity always remains at the same height . Conditionsforstable Equilibrium : Forstableequilibrium of a body , the following two conditions should be fulfilled .
1. The centre of gravity of the body should be at the minimum height .
2. The vertical line passing through the centre of gravity of the body should pass through the base of the body ..
Mechanical energy into electrical energy Chemical energy into light and heat energy Sound energy into electrical energy , Electrical energy into sound energy Solar energy into electrical energy Electrical energy into light energy . Electrical energy into light and heat energy , Chemical energy into electrical energy .

1. Dynamo 2 Candle 3.Microphone
4. Loud Speaker 5. Solar Cell 6. Tubelight 17. Electric Bulb 8. Battery

3. Work , Energy and Power Work : If a body gets displaced when a force acts on it , work is said to be done . Work is measured by the product of force and displacement of the body along the direction of force .
9 ) Electric motor 10. Sitar
Electrical energy into mechanical energy Mechanical energy into sound energy Light energy into electrical energy . Relation between Momentum and Kinetic Energy
If a body gets displaced by S when a force Facts on it , then the work W = F S cose where 0 = angle between force and displacement If both force and displacement are in the same direction , then W = FS

11. Photo cell
K.E = 2 where p = momentum = mv @apna kira.Clearly when momentum is doubled , kinetic energy
> If force and displacement are perpendicular to each other , W = 0 as cose = 0 . For example , in case of uniform circular motion work done by the centripetal force is zero Work is a scalar quantity and its SI unit is joule . Energy : Capacity of doing work by a body is called its
becomes four times .
Power Rate of doing work is called power . If an agent does W work in time , then power of ager
SI unit of power is watt named as a respect to the scientist James Watt .
energy .
Energy is a scalar quantity and its SI unit is joule . Energy developed in a body due to work done on it is called mechanical energy :. Mechanical energy is of two types : 1 : Potential Energy
2. Kinetic Energy
watt = joule / sec ..
1 kW = 10³ watt , 1 MW = 10 ° watt Horse power is a practical unit of power . 1 H.P. 746 watt .
job
1 watt second = 1 watt x 1 second = 1 joule . 1 watt hour ( Wh ) = 3600 joule 1 kilowatt hour ( kWh ) = 3.6 x 10 joule . W , KW , MW & H.P . are units of power . Ws , Wh , kWh are units of work and energy .
Potential Energy : The capacity of doing work developed in a'body due to its position or configuration is called its potential energy . Example :
1. energy of stretched or compressed spring
2. energy of water collected at a height
3. energy of spring in a watch
4. stretched bow

4. Gravitation Gravitation Every body attracts other body by a force called force of gravitation . Newton's law of Gravitation : The force of gravitational attraction between two point bodies is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them . * Consider two point bodies of masses mand m₂ placed at a distance r . The force of gravitational attraction between mi !!!
PE of a body in the gravitational field of earth is mgh .. where m = mass , g = acceleration due to gravity , h = height of the body from surface of the earth . Kinetic Energy Energy possessed by a body due to its motion is called Kinetic Energy of the body .. If a body of mass is moving with speed u , then kinetic 1 energy of the body is ½ mv² A flying aeroplane has both potential as well as kinetic energy .
יין .
them , F = G
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. 8 is minimum at equator .
1 .
48 decreases due to rotation of earth . g decreases if angular speed of earth increases and increases if angular speed of earth decreases . If angular speed of earth becomes 17 times its present value , a body on the equator becomes weightless . Weight of a body in a lift
mass .
✓ The period of revolution of satellite revolving near the surface of earth is 1 hour 24 minute ( 84 minute ) Geo - Stationary Satellite : If a satellite revolves in equatorial plane in the direction of earth's rotation ie from west to east with a period of revolution equal to time upward or down ward ) , the apparent weight apna_kirarperiod of rotation of earth on its own axis i.e. 24 hours , then
If lift is stationary or moving with uniform speed ( either body
1 .
is equal to its true weight .
If lift is going up with acceleration , the apparent weight of a body is more than the true weight ... If lift is going down with acceleration , the apparent weight of a body is less than the true weight . If the cord of the lift is broken , it falls freely . In this situation the weight of a body in the lift becomes zero . This is the situation of weightlessness . While going down , if the acceleration of lift is more than acceleration due to gravity , a body in the lift goes in contact of the ceiling of lift . Kepler's Laws of planetary motion All planets move around the sun in elliptical orbits , with the sun being at rest at one focus of the orbit . The position vector of the planet with sun at the origin sweeps out equal area in equal time i.e. the areal velocity , of planet around the sun always remains constant . A consequence of this law is that the speed of planet increases when the planet is closer to the sun and decreases when the planet is far away from sun .. Speed of a planet is maximum when it is at perigee and minimum when it is at apogee . The square of the period of revolution of a planet around the sun is directly proportional to the cube of mean distance of planet from the sun .. IfTis period of revolution and ris the mean distance of planet from sun then T
the satellite will appear stationary relative to earth . Such a satellite is called Geo - stationary satellite . Such a satellite revolves around the earth at a height of 36000 km . The orbit . of Geo - stationary satellite is called parking orbit . Arthur C Clarck was first to predict that a communication satellite can be stationed in the geosynchronous orbit . Escape velocity Escape velocity is that minimum velocity with which a body should be projected from the surface of earth so as it goes out of gravitational field of earth and never return to earth . Escape velocity is independent of the mass , shape and size of the body and its direction of projection . Escape velocity is also called second cosmic velocity . For earth , escape velocity = 11.2 km / s . For moon , escape velocity = 2.4 km / s . Orbital velocity of a satellite √gR and escape velocity v = √ / 2gR where R = Radius of earth .
2 .
3 .
So , v = √2v i.e. escape velocity is √2 times the orbital vē velocity , Therefore if the orbital velocity of a satellite is increased to √2 times ( increased by 41 % ) , the satellite will leave the orbit and escape .

5. Pressure
Pressure Pressure is defined as force acting norm on unit area of the surface . Join on Telegram @apna channels

6. Floatation
Pressure ( p ) = Ã
Buoyant Force : When a body is immersed party
SI unit of pressure is N / m² also called pascal ( Pa ) . Pressure is a scalar quantity . Some application of the concept of pressure : The bags and suitcases are provided with broad handles so that small pressure is exerted on the hand while carrying them .: Railway tracks are laid on large sized wooden sleepers so that thrust due to weight of train is spread over a large area . Pins are made to have pointed ends . This explains why needle is used to brust a gas filled balloon because needle exerts more pressure . Atmospheric Pressure : Atmospheric pressure is that pressure which is exerted by a mercury column of 76 cm length at 0 ° C at 45 ° latitude at the sea - level . It is equal to ** weight of 76 cm column of mercury of cross - sectional area 1 cm² . Generally it is measured in bar . 1 bar = 105 N / m² Atmospheric pressure 1 atm = 1.01 bar = 1.01 × 10 ° N / m² = 760 torr One torr is the pressure exerted by a mercury column of 1 mm length . Atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude ( height from earth's surface ) . This is why
1. It is difficult to cook on the mountain
2. The fountain pen of a passenger leaks in aeroplane at height .
wholly in a liquid , a force acts on the body by the liquid in the upward direction . This force is called Buoyant force or force of buoyancy or upthrust . It is equal to the weight of liquid displaced by the body and acts at the centre of gravity of displaced liquid . Its study was first made by Archimedes . Archimedes Principle : When a body is immersed partly : or wholly in a liquid , there is an apparent loss in the weight of the body which is equal to the weight of liquid displaced by the body .
Law of Floatation
A body floats in a liquid if

1. Density of material of body is less than or equal to the density of liquid .
2. If density of material of body is equal to density of liquid , the body floats fully submerged in liquid in neutral equilibrium . '
3. When body floats in neutral equilibrium , the weight of the body is equal to the weight of displaced liquid .
4. The centre of gravity of the body and centre of gravity of the displaced liquid should be in one vertical line . Centre of Buoyancy : The centre of gravity of the liquid displaced by a body is called centre of buoyancy .
Meta Centre : When a floating body is slightly tilted @apn from equilibrium position , the centre of buoyancy shifts . The point at which the vertical line passing through the new position of centre of buoyancy meets with the initial line is called meta centre .
kira
Atmospheric pressure is measured by barometer : With the help of barometer , weather forecast can be made . Sudden fall in barometric reading is the indication of .
storm .
When a solid body is dropped from the boat ( floating in water ) , the level of water will , fall if density of solid > density of water and body will sink . remain unchanged if density of solid < density of water and body will float . When a piece of ice , floating in liquid melts completely , the level of liquid + water :
Slow fall in barometric reading is the indication of rain . Slow rise in the barometric reading is the indication of clear weather . Pressure in liquid : Force exerted on unit area of wall or base of the container by the molecules of liquid is the pressure of liquid . The pressure exerted by liquid at : depth h below the surface of liquid is given as p = hdg where d is the density of liquid .
remain unchanged if density of liquid = density of water
1 .
falls if density of liquid < density of water
2 .
Regarding pressure , the following points are worth noting :
3 .
rises if density of liquid > density of water .
A piece of solid embedded with an ice block is floating

1. In a static liquid at same horizontal level ; pressure is same at all points .
པས ཚ
in water . If ice melts completely , the level of water Falls if density of solid > density of water "
1 .
Pressure at a point in a static liquid has same value in . all directions
Does not change if density of solid < density of water .
2 .
If passengers in a boat floating in a tank drink water from the tank , level of water in the tank does not change . Conditions for stable equilibrium of Floating body
Pressure at a point in a liquid is proportional to the depth of the point from the free surface ... Pressure at a point in a liquid is proportional to the density of the liquid . Pascal law for pressure of liquid If gravitational attraction is negligible , in equilibrium condition , pressure is same at all points in a liquid . If an external pressure is applied to an exclosed fluid It is transmitted undiminished to every direction .
The meta centre always be higher than the centre of gravity of the body . The line joining the centre of gravity of the body and centre of flotation should be vertical . Mass : The amount of substance contained in a body is Hydrolle lift , hyj☺insondreelegram @aona channels
The n
Pascal law
Massis constant quantity . It does not change likeweight

7. Surface Tension
Cohesive Force : The force of attraction between the molecules of same substance is called cohesive force . Cohesive force is maximum in solids . This is why solids have a fixed shape . Cohesive force is negligible in case of gases .
Adhesive Force Force of attraction between the molecules of different substances is called adhesive force . Due to adhesive force , one body sticks to other . Surface Tension : Surface tension is the property of a liquid by virtue of which it has the tendency to have the area of its free surface minimum as if it were under tension like a stretched elastic membrane .
A liquid drop attains spherical shape due to surface tension , since , for given volume , sphere has minimum surface area . Surface tension of a liquid is measured by the normal force acting per unit length on either side of " an imaginary line drawn on the free surface of liquid and tangential to the free surface . So , if a force Facts on an imaginary line of length 1 , then surface tension , T = F / 1 . Work done in increasing the surface area of a liquid by unity under isothermal condition is equal to surface tension of liquid . According to this definition , unit of surface tension is joule / meter ?. Surface tension of a liquid decreases with the increase of temperature and becomes zero at critical temperature .. Capillary tube : A tube having very narrow ( fine ) and uniform bore is called a capillary tube . Capillarity : If a capillary tube is dipped in a liquid , liquid ascends or descends in the capillary tube . This phenomenon is called capillarity . : The height by which liquid ascends or decends in a capillary tube depends upon the radius of the tube .
> Excess pressure in a liquid drop
R ...
Excess pressure in a soap bubble = T = surface tension , R = radius ...

8. Viscosity
Viscous force : The force which opposes the relative . motion between different layers of liquid or gases is called viscous force . Viscosity : Viscosity is the property of a liquid by virtue of which it opposes the relative motion between its different layers . ➤ Viscosity is the property of liquids and gases both . The viscosity of a liquid is due to cohesive force between its molecules . The viscosity of a gas is due to diffusion of its molecules from one layer to other layer . Viscosity of gases is much less than that of liquids . There is no viscosity in solids . **** Viscosity of an ideal fluid is zero . With rise in temperature , viscosity of liquids decreases and that for gases increases . ** Viscosity of a fluid is measured by its coefficient of viscosity . Its SI unit is decapoise ( kg / ms ) or pascal second . It is generally denoted by n . Terminal Velocity When a body falls in a viscous medium ; its velocity first increases and finally becomes shape of mercury on Telegram @apna channel§rminal velocity .
The capillarity depends on the nature of liquid and . solid both . The liquid which wets the wall of tube rises in the tube and the liquid which does not wet the wall of tube descends in the tube . For example , when a glass capillary . tube is dipped in water , water rises in the tube and shape of ... water meniscus is concave , similarly when a glass capillary- tube is dipped in mercury , mercury decends in the tube and

10. Simple Harmonic Motion Periodic Motion » Any motion which repeats itself after regular interval of time is called periodic or harmonic motion . Motion of hands of a clock ; motion of earth around the sun , motion of the needle of a sewing machine , motion of pendulum are the examples of periodic motion . Oscillatory Motion : If a particles repeats its motion after a regular time interval about a fixed point , motion is said to be oscillatory or vibratory . i.e. oscillatory motion is a constrained periodic motion between precisely fixed limits . Motion of piston in an automobile engine , motion of balance wheel of a watch are the examples of oscillatory motion . Time period : Time taken in one complete oscillation is called time period . Or , Time after which motion is repeated is called time period . Frequency = Frequency is the no . of oscillations . completed by oscillating body in unit time interval . Its SI unit is Hertz .
frequency , T = time period , then nT = 1 Simple Harmonic Motion : If a particle repeats its motion about a fixed point after a regular time interval in such a way that at any moment the acceleration of the particle is directly proportional to its displacement from the fixed point at that moment and is always directed towards the fixed point then the motion of the particle is called simple harmonic motion . The fixed point is called mean point .
@apna
Characteristics of SHM
Venturimeter , a device used to measure rate of flow of fluid , works on Bernoulli's theorem .
Kir
When a particle executing SHM passes through the mean position : "

9. Elasticity
1 .
No force acts on the particle .
Elasticity : Elasticity is the property of material of a body by virtue of which the body acquires its original shape and size after the removal of deforming force .
2 .
Acceleration of the particle is zero .
3 .
Velocity is maximum .
4 .
Kinetic energy is maximum .
Elastic Limit : Elastic limit is the maximum value of deforming force upto which a material shows elastic property and above which the material looses its elastic property .
5 .
Potential energy is zero .
When a particle executing SHM is at the extreme end , then :
Acceleration of the particle is maximum .
1 .
Stress : The restoring force per unit area set up inside the body subjected to deforming force is called stress . Strain : The relative change in dimension or shape of a [ body which is subjected to stress is called strain . It is measured by ratio of change in length to the original length ( longitudinal strain ) , change in volume to original volume ( volume strain ) .. Hooke's law : Under elastic limit , stress is proportional
2 .
Restoring force acting on particle is maximum .
3 .
Velocity of particle is zero .
4 .
Kinetic energy of particle is zero .
5 .
Potential energy is maximum :
Simple Pendulum : If a point mass is suspended from a fixed support with the help of a massless and inextensible string , the arrangement is called simple pendulum . The above is an ideal definition . Practically a simple pendulum is made by suspending a small ball ( called bob ) from a fixed support with the help of a light string : If the bob of a simple pendulum is slightly displaced from its mean position and released , it starts oscillating in simple harmonic motion . Time taken in one complete oscillation ( time period of oscillation ) is given as T = 2 8 where I is the effective length of the pendulum and g is the acceleration due to gravity . Ifa person on a swing stands up , his centre of gravity . rises up , length of pendulum decreases and as a gram @apna channels @apna_channels
to strain
stress i.e. stress & strain or strain E is called elastic constant or modulus of elasticity . Its value is different for different material . Its SI unit is Nm also called pascal , Elastic constant is of three types : Young's modulus of elasticity Y =
= E ( constant )
Longitudinal stress Longitudinal strain Volume stress Volume Strain
Bulk modulus of elasticity
Rigidity moduloin Join or
Shear str

7.8x10 to 78 × 103 102
On moon , value of gisth the value on earth . Hence if a pendulum clock which keeps correct time on : earth is taken to moon , time period becomes v6 times the value on earth . As a result , the clock will run √6 times slower . Seconds pendulum : A simple pendulum whose time period is 2 sec . Its length is approximately 1m .
Infra red rays . Hershel Short radio waves Heinrich or Hertzian Waves Hertz
10 10 1
10 ° to 10
Long Rádio Wayes Marconi Electromagnetic waves of wavelength range 10³ mw 10m are called microwaves . . In electromagnetic wave , electric field vector and magnetic field vector vibrate perpendicular to eachother and also perpendicular to the direction of propagatio
10 to 10
1 to 10

11. Wave
of wave .
A wave is a disturbance which propagates energy from one place to the other without the transport of matter . Waves are broadly of two types :
1. Mechanical Wave
2. Non - mechanical Wave Mechanical Wave : The waves which require material medium ( solid , liquid or gas ) for their propagation are called mechanical wave or elastic wave . Mechanical waves are of two types : Longitudinal Wave : If the particles of the medium vibrate in the direction of propagation of wave , the wave is called longitudinal wave . Waves on springs or sound waves in air are examples of longitudinal waves . Transverse Wave : If the particles of the medium vibrate . perpendicular to the direction of propagation of wave ,. the wave is called transverse wave . Waves on strings under tension , waves on the surface of water are examples of transverse waves .
Phase of vibration : Phase of vibration of a vibrating particle at any instant is the physical quantity which express the position as well as direction of motion of the particle at that instant with respect to its equilibrium ( mean ) position . Amplitude Amplitude is defined as the maximum displacement of the vibrating particle on either side from the equilibrium position . Wavelength : Wavelength is the distance between an ang two nearest particle of the medium , vibrating in the same phase . It is denoted by the Greek letter lambda . (
2. ) . In transverse wave distance between two consecutive . crests or troughs and in longitudinal wave , distance between · two consecutive compressions or rarefactions is equal to wavelength . Relation between wavelength , frequency and velocity of wave : Velocity of wave frequency x wavelength or , v = n ) . > A path difference of Ax corresponds to a phase difference Ap where A = 27. Ax . Δφ
" Waves produced by a moving motor boat on the surface of water is both transverse as well as longitudinal . Non - mechanical waves or electromagnetic waves : The waves which do not require medium for their propagation i.e. which can propagate even through the vacuum are called non mechanical wave . Light , heat are the examples of non - mechanical wave . In fact all the electromagnetic waves are non - mechanical . All the electromagnetic wave consists of photon . The wavelength range of electromagnetic wave is 10m to 10 m Properties of electromagnetic waves
1. They are neutral ( uncharged ) .
2. They propagate as transverse wave .
3. They propagate with the velocity of light , They contains energy and momentum . Their concept was introduced by Maxwell . Following waves are not electromagnetic . 1.Cathode rays 2.Canal rays 3.d rays 4 : ẞrays 5.Sound wave 6. Ultrasonic wave Some Important Electromagnetic Waves Electro - Discoverer Wavelength range Frequency magnetic Waves ( in meter ) 10 to 100

12. Sound Wave
Sound waves are longitudinal mechanical waves . > According to their frequency range , longitudinal mechanical waves are divided into the following categories :
1. Audible or Sound Waves : The longitudinal mechanical waves which lie in the frequency range 20 Hz to 20000 Hz are called audible or sound waves . These waves are sensitive to human ear . These are generated by the vibrating bodies such as tuning fork , vocal cords etc.
2. Infrasonic Waves : The longitudinal mechanical waves having frequencies less than 20 Hz are called Infrasonic . These waves are produced by sources of bigger size such as earth quakes , volcanic eruptions , ocean waves and by elephants and whales .

3. Ultrasonic Waves : The longitudinal mechanical waves having frequencies greater than 20000 Hz are called ultrasonic waves . Human ear can not detect these waves . But certain creatures like dog , cat , bat , mosquito can detect these waves . Bats not only detect but also produce ultrasonic . Ultrasonic waves can be produced by Galton's whistle or Hartman's generator or by the high frequency vibrations of a quartz crystal under an alternating electric field ( Piezo - electric effect ) or by the vibrations of a ferromagnetic rod under an alternating magneti field ( Magnetostriction ) Applications of Ultrasonic Waves omirelogram @apna channels
range 1020 to 1018
Henry Becqueral
Rays
W. Rontgen 10 to 10
10 to 106
Ultra - viole
10 to 104
Ritter
10 to 10
Visible rad

273.15K 492 Ra
0 ° C
32 ° F
O'R
LFP
and
Absolute -273.15 ° C -459.6 ° F -218.4 ° R . OK 0 : Ra
zero
Relation between Temperature on different scales . C - 0 F - 32 R - 0 K - 273 Ra - 492 100 180 80 180 Conversion of temp difference from one scale to other scale . AC AF AR AK AR
100
5 9 4
Celsius was initially known as centigrade . While expressing temperature on kelvin scale " ( degree ) is not used . * Freezing point ( F.P. ) of mercury is -39 ° C . Hence to measure temperature below this temperature , alcohol thermometer is used . F.P. of alcohol is -115˚C . Range of different thermometers Mercury Thermometer : from -30 ° C to 350 ° C ;

13. Heat
Heat is that form of energy which flows from one body to other body due to difference is temperature between the bodies . The amount of heat contained in a body depends upon the mass of the body . If W work is performed and heat produced is H then
Hor , W = JH where ] is a constant called Mechanicalapna_kir @ onstant volume gas thermometer : Equivalent of Heat . Its value is 4.186 joule / calorie . It means if 4.186 joule of work is performed , 1 calorie of heat is consumed .
***
from -200 ° C to 500 ° C ( with H₂ ) , below - 200 ° C upto -268 ° C ( with He ) above 1000 ° C upto 1600 ° C ( with N₂ gas and bulb of glazed porcelain )
Units of Heat :
Platinum resistance thermometer :: from -200 ° C to
CGS unit calorie = It is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1.g of pure water through 1 ° C . International calorie : It is the amount of heat required · to raise the temperature of 1 g of pure water from 14.5 ° C to 15.5 ° C . FPS unit B.Th.U ( British . Thermal Unit ) = It is the amount of heat required to raise the temp . of 1 pound of pure water through 1 : F .. Relations between different units : 1 B.Th.U 252 calorie 1 calorie = 4.186 joule 1 Therm = 10 ° B.Th.U. 1 pound calorie - 453.6 calorie .. Temperature Temperature is that physical cause which decides the direction of flow of heat from one body , to other body . Heat energy always flows from body at higher temperature to body at lower temperature . Measurement of Temperature Thermometer The device which measures the temperature of a body is called thermometer . Scales of temperature measurement To measure temperature two fixed points are taken on each thermometer . One of the fixed points is the freezing lower fixed point ( LFP ) . The point of water or ice point á other fixed point is the boiling point of water or steam point
1200 ° C
Thermocouple thermometer : from - 200 ° C to 1600 ° C- Total Radiation Pyrometer
him
When a body is at high temperature , it glows brightly and the colour of radiation emitted by the body is directly proportional to the fourth power of absolute temperature of the body . Radiation pyrometer measures the temperature of a body by measuring the colour of radiation emitted by the body . This thermometer is not put in contact with the body . But it can not measure temperature below 800 ° C because at low temperature emission of radiation is very small and can not be detected . This is why it is used to measure temperature inside metallurgical furnace . Specific Heat Capacity : Specific heat capacity of a material is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of unit mass of substance through 1 ' . Its SI unit is Joule / kilogram kelvin ( J / kgK ) Specific Heat Capacities of One calorie of heat is required different materials ( J / kg ) to raise the temperature of 1 Water gram of water through 1 ° C . Ice . Hence specific heat capacity Iron of water is 1 cal / gram ° C . KOil
4200
2100
460
210
140
calorie / gram C = 4200 Mercury
130
as upper fixed på @IM on Telegram @ apnan.channels

2. Translucent : The substances which allow a part of incident light to pass through themarecalled translucent bodies.e.g . oiled paper .
3. Opaque : The substances which do not allow the incident light to pass through them are called opaque bodies . e.g. , mirror , metal , wood etc. Shadow : Shadow is the dark region on a screen when an opaque object is placed in the path of light . If is due to rectilinear propagation of light , In case of point source , the shadow has shapely defined outline . In case of extended source of light , the shadow has two

14. Light
Light is a form of energy which is propagated as electromagnetic waves . In the spectrum of electromagnetic waves it lies between ultra - violet and infra - red region and has wavelength between 3900 Å to 7800
A. Electromagnetic waves are transverse , hence light is transverse wave . . All the electromagnetic waves including light do not require medium to propagate . Wave nature of light explains rectilinear propagation , reflection , refraction , interference , diffraction and polarisation of light .
distinct regions .
· Polarisation supports transverse nature of light . The phenomena like photoelectric effect , compton . effect are not explained on the basis of wave nature of light . These phenomena are explained on the basis of quantum theory of light / particle nature of light as proposed by Einstein . In quantum theory , light is regarded as a packet or bundle of energy called photon . Photon is associated with it an energy E where E = hv . Clearly light behaves as wave and particle both . Thus light has dual nature . Speed of light was first measured by Roemer ( 1678 AD ) . Speed of light is maximum in vacuum and air ( 3 × 10³ . m / s ) ( and independent of density , température and pressure )
Umbra : The region in which no light reaches . ( region of complete darkness ) Penumbra : The region in which partial light reaches . Reflection of light : Light moving in one medium when falls at the surface of another medium , part of light returns back to the same medium . This phenomenon of returning back of light in the first medium at the interface of two media is known as reflection of light . > If the reflecting surface is smooth , reflection is regular . In case of rough surface , reflection is irregular .
Laws of reflection
The incident ray , reflected ray and normal to the reflecting surface at the incident point all lie in the same plane . The angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2. The size of image is equal to that of object .
3. The distance of image from the mirror is equal to distance of object from the mirror . Ifanobject moves towards ( oraway from ) a plane mirror with speed v , the image moves towards ( or away ) with a speed 2v relative to the object . If a plane mirror is rotated by an angle 8 , keeping the incident ray fixed , the reflected ray is rotated by an angle 20 . To see his full image in a plane mirror , a person requires a mirror of at least half of his height .
( a ) If Ꮎ .
is even integer , then ii If 360 is odd integer , then n =
360 -- 1 if the objes
( b ) If
Ꮎ ;
is symmetrically placed . and
360 .8
11 = if the object is not symmetrically places ( c ) If 300 is a fraction then'n is equal to integral par
0 .
Focal length of a plane mirror is infinite . Reflection from spherical mirror Spherical mirrors are of two types 1 : Concave mín
If two plane mirrors are inclined to each other at an angle ´ and
2. Convex mirror Position & nature of image formed by a spherical mirror Size of image in comparison to Object Nature of it
Position of object Concave mirroi
Position of image
At infinity
Highly diminished
At Focus
Real , inverted
Between infinity and centre of curvature Between focus and centre of curvature Diminished , At centre of curvature .
Real , inverted
At centre of curvature .
Real , inverted
Of same size
Between focus and centre of curvature Between centre of curvature and infinity Enlarged Atfocus
Real , inverted
At infinity
Real ; inverted
Highly enlarged Enlarged
Behind the mirror
Between focus and pole
Virtual , erect
Convex mirror
At infinity .
Virtual , erect
At Focus
Highly diminished Diminished
Virtual , erect
Infront of mirror
Between pole and focus
Note : Image formed by a convex mirror is always virtual , erect and diminished .
Uses of Concave mirror :
sini sinr
¹µ ( constant )
i.e.
@apna_kira This constant u , is called refractive index of second

1. As a shaving glass .

2. As a reflector for the head lights of a vehicle , search light .
3. In opthalmoscope to examine eye , ear , nose by doctors .
4. In solar cookers . 5. In concentrating light at a given spot . Uses of Convex mirror :
medium with respect to the first medium . Absolute refractive index of a medium is defined as the ratio of speed of light in free space ( vacuum ) to thatė : the given medium . i.e. absolute refractive index ( μ )
As a rear view mirror in vehicle because it provides the maximum rear field of view and image formed is always erect .
Speed of light in vacuum Speed of light in the medium The refractive index of a medium is different fr different colours . The refractive index of a mediur decreases with the increase in wavelength of light . Hent refractive index of a medium is maximum for vid colour of light and minimum for red colour of light . The refractive index of a medium decreases with th increase in temperature . But this variation is very smal When a ray of light enters from one medium to othe medium , its frequency and phase donot change b wavelength and velocity change vagy th Some illustrations of Refraction ' : Bending of a linear object when it is partially dippede a liquid inclined to the surface of the liquid . Twinkling of stars .
In sodium reflector lamp .
Refraction of light : When a ray of light propagating in a b medium enters the other medium , it deviates from its path . This phenomenon of change in the direction of propagation of light at the boundary when it passes from one medium to other medium is called refraction of light . When a ray of light enters from rarer medium to denser medium ( as from water to glass ) it deviates towards the * normal drawn on the boundary of two media at the incident point . Similarly in passing from denser to rarer medium , a ray deviates away from the normal . If light is incident normally on the boundary i.e. parallel to normal , it enters the second medium undeviated .
Laws of refraction

1. Incidentray , refracted ray and normal drawnatincident point always lie in the same plane . Snell's law : For a given colour of light , the ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of refraction is a constant ,
2 .
3 .
Oval shape of sun in the morning and evening .
An object in a denser medium when seen from a rar medium appears to be at a smaller distance : Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Lightmust be propagating from denser to rarermedium . This is why if light goes from water to glass , total internal reflection will not take place .
lenses .
If a part of lens is blackened , the image is formed of the same position and of same nature but with less brightness . Change in the power of a lens : If a lens is dipped in a liquid , its focal length and power both change . This change depends upon the refractive indices of lens and the liquid . If a lens of refractive index p is dipped in a liquid of refractive Index μ ' , then the following three situations are possible

2. Angle of incidence must exceeds the critical angle .. Illustrations of total internal reflection :
Sparkling of diamond
2. Mirage and looming .
1 .
Shining of air bubble in water .
3 .
Increase in duration of sun's visibility - The sun becomesha visible even before sun rise and remains visible even after sunset due to total internal reflection of light . 5. Shining of a smoked ball or a metal ball on which lamp soot is deposited when dipped in water .
4 .
kirs

1. μ > μ'i.e . lens is dipped in a liquid of smaller refractive . index like a lens of glass ( u = 1.5 ) is dipped in water ( u 1.33 ) , then the focal length of the lens increases and the power of the lens decreases ... µ = µ ^ i.e . lens is dipped in a liquid of equal refractive index then the focal length of the lens becomes infinite i.e. its power becomes zero . The lens and the liquid behave as a single medium . usu'i.e . lens is dipped in a liquid of higher refractive index the focal length increases i.e. power decreases as well as the nature of the lens also changes i.e.convex lens behaves as concave lens and vice - versa . For example , an air bubble trapped in water or glass appears as convex but behaves as concave lens . Similarly a convex lens of glass ( u = 1.5 ) when dipped in carbon disulphide ( u = 1.68 ) , it behaves as a concave lens . Formation of images by lenses Position of
Optical Fibre Optical fibre consists of thousands of strands of a very fine quality glass or quartz ( of refractive index 1.7 ) , each strand coated with a layer of material of lower refractive index ( 1.5 ) . In it , light is propagated along the axis of fibre through multiple total internal reflection , even though the fibre is curved , without loss of energy .
6 .
Applications :

1. Fortransmitting optical signals and the two dimensional pictures .
2. For transmitting electrical signals by first converting them to light . 43. For visualising the internal sites of the body by doctors in endoscopy . Refraction of Light Through Lens
Size of
Nature of
Position of _object : Convex Lens At infinity
Lens is a section of transparent refractive material of two surfaces of definite geometrical shape of which one surface mustbespherical . Lens is generally of two types : Convex lens
2. Concave lens . When a lens is thicker at the middle than at the edges , it is called a convex lens or a converging lens . When the lens is thicker at the edges than in the middle , it is called as . concave lens or diverging lens . · Some terms regarding a lens .
Highly diminished Between Fand 2F Diminished Real , inverted AE2F . Of same size ⠀⠀⠀⠀ Real , inverted Between Fand 2F Beyond 2F Enlarged Real , inverted AUF At infinity : Highly enlarged Real , inverted
Real , inverted
At Focus
1 .
Bevond 2 F A12F
Between optical The same side as Enlarged Virtualanderect centre and F
in the object
Join on Telegram @apna channels

15. Static Electricity
Remedy : A converging ( convex ) lens is used .
3. Presbyopia : This defect is generally found in elderly person . Due to stiffening of ciliary muscles , eye looses . much of its accommodating power , As a result distinct as well as nearby objects can not be seen . For its remedy two separate lens or a bifocal lens is used . Astigmatism : This defect arises due to difference in the radii of curvature of cornea in the different planes . As a result point in one plane of an object appear in focus while those in other plane are out of focus . For its remedy cylindrical lens is used .
When two bodies are rubbed together , they acquire the property of attracting light objects like small bits of paper , dust particles ete . The bodies which acquire this property are said to be electrified or charged with electricity . Charge : Charge is the basic property associated with matter due to which it produces and experiences electrical and magnetic effects . > Benjamin Frankline named the two types of charges as positive and negative . Similar charges repel each other and opposite charges attract each other , ar Join on Telegram @apna_channels

17. Magnetism
Magnetism is the property displayed by magnets and produced by the movement of electric charges , which results in objects being attracted or pushed away , Magnet is a piece of iron or other materials that can attract iron containing objects and that points north and south when suspended : in series with an Telegram @apna_channels
The resistance of an
deal voltmeter is infinite ,
Electric fuse : Electric . fuse is a protective device used
from being

2. Paramagnetic Substance : Paramagnetic substances such substances which when placed in a magnetic field acquire a feeble magnetism in the direction of the field . Examples : Aluminum , Platinum , Manganese , Sodium , Oxygen etc.
3. Ferromagnetic Substance : Ferromagnetic substances are those substance , which when placed in a magnetic " field , are strongly magnetised in the direction of field ... Examples : Iron , Cobalt , Nickel etc.
Domain Atoms of ferromagnetic substance have a permanent dipole moment i.c. they behave like a very sma magnet . The atoms form a large no . of effective regions called domain in which 1018 to 1021 atoms have their dipole moment aligned in the same direction . The magnetism in ferromagnetic substance , when placed in a magnetic field , is developed due to these domain by
1. the displacements of boundaries of the domains
2. the rotation of the domains . Curie Temperature : As temperature increases , the magnetic property of ferromagnetic substance decreases and above a certain temperature the substance changes into paramagnetic substance . This temperature is called Curie temperature . Permanent magnets are made of steel , cobalt steel , ticonal , alcomax and alnico . Electromagnets , cores of transformers , telephone diaphragms , armatures of dynamos and motors are made of soft iron , mu - metal and stalloy . Terrestrial Magnetism : Our earth behaves as a powerful magnet whose south pole is near the geographical north pole and whose north pole is near the geographical south pole . The magnetic field of earth at a place is described in the terms of following three elements .
1. Declination The acute angle between magnetic meridian and geographical meridian at a place is called the angle of declination at that place .
2. Dip or Inclination : Dip is the angle which the resultant earth's magnetic field at a place makes with the horizontal . At poles and equator , dip is 90 ° and 0 . respectively .
3. Horizontal component of earth's magnetic field : Ata place it is defined as the component of earth's magnetic field along the horizontal in the magnetic meridian . Its valve is different at different places . ( approximately 0.4 gauss or 0.4 × 10 ^ tesla ) . Magnetic Maps : Magnetic maps are the geographical maps on which the values of three magnetic elements of earth are represented . On the magnetic maps , following lines are important : Isogonic lines : The lines joining the places of same declination are called isogonic lines . Agonic line : The line joining the places of zero declination is called agonic line . Isoclinic lines : The lines joining the places of same dip are called isoclinic lines . – Aclinic line : The line joining the places of zero dip called aclinic line or magnetic equator . Isodynamic lines : The lines joining the places of same value of horizontal component of earth's magnetic field are called isodynamic lines . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

18. Atomic & Nuclear Physica
If perforated cathode is used in a discharge tube , it is observed that a new type of rays are produced from anode moving towards the cathode and passed through the holes of cathode . These rays are positively charged and are called positive rays or canal rays or anode rays . These rays were
Atomic Physics
E. Rutherford is known as the father of nuclear physics . Atom is the smallest part of matter which takes part in chemical reactions . Atoms of the same element are similar in mass , size and characteristics . Atom consists of three fundamental particles electron , proton and neutron . All the protons and neutrons are present in the central core of atom called nucleus . Electrons revolve around the nucleus . In an atom , electrons and protons are equal in number and have equal and opposite charge . Hence atom is neutral . Properties of Fundamental Particles Mass ( kg ) Charge ( Coulomb ) Discoverer
discovered by Goldstein . Properties of Canal rays :

1. The positive rays consists of positively charged particles .
2. These rays travel in straight line . 3 ... These rays can exert pressure and thus possess , energy ...
kinetic .
These rays are deflected by electric and magnetic fields . These rays are capable of producing physical and chemical changes :
4 .
5 .

6. These rays can produce ionisation in gases . Radioactivity Radioactivity is the seriding out of harmful radiation or particles , caused when atomic nuclei breakup spontaneously . Radioactivity was discovered by Henry Becquerel for which he received the Nobel Prize of Physics jointly with Madame Curie and Pierre Curie . The nucleus having protons 83 or more are unstable . They emit α , B and y particles and become stable . The elements of such nucleus are called radioactive elements and the phenomenon of emission of a . Band y particles is called radioactivity . times Positive and Yakawa unstable @apna kirzelectron is created due to conversion of neutron into . B rays are fast moving electrons . In the nucleus an
Particle

1.672 × 10-27
Rutherford
Proton
+1.6 × 10-19

1.675 x 1027
Neutron
Chadwick Thomson
-1.6 × 109

9.108 × 10-31
Electron
Note : Proton was discovered by Goldstein and named by Rutherford . Till today , several subatomic particles have been discovered . Some important of them are as follows . Particle Mass ( kg ) Charge Discoverer Positron : 9.108 × 10-31 +1.6 × 10 19 Anderson
Antiparticle of electron
Neutrino h Pi - meson 274

0. Pauli
the mass of negative both
electron
proton .
Photon
Velocity equal to that of light :
rays are electromagnetic waves.yrays are emitted after the emission of a and B rays . Robert Pierre and his wife Madame Curie discovered a new radioactive element radium , The rays emitted by radioactivity were first recognised by Rutherford . The end product of all natural radioactive element after emission of radioactive rays is lead . Difference between stable and unstable nucleus Stable nucleus
Cathode Rays : If the gas pressure in a discharge tube is 102 to 10-3 mm of Hg and a potential difference of 10 volt is applied between the electrodes , then a beam of electrons emerges from the cathode which is called cathode rays . .Hence cathode rays are beam of high energy electrons . Cathode is an electrode with a negative charge . Properties of cathode rays :
1. Cathode rays are invisible and travel in straight line .
2. These rays carry negative charge and travel from
Unstable nucleus High atomic number , High mass number Nucleus of bigger size
Low atomic number Low mass number : Nucleus of small size .
cathode to anode .

3. These rays emerge perpendicular to the cathode surface and are not affected by the position of anode .
4. Cathode rays travel with very high velocity ( 1 / 10th the velocity of light ) . 5. These rays are deflected by electric and magnetic fields . 6. These rays can ionise gases . 7. - These rays heat the material on which they fall . 8. They can produce chemical change and thus affect a photographic plate . 9. These rays can penetrate through thin metal foils . 10. The source of emf used in the production of cathode rays is induction coil . When they strike a target of heavy metals such as tungsten , they produce x - rays . 12. The nature of cathode rays is independent of nature of
Properties of α , ẞ and y particles
Properties
Nucleus
Nucleus
Nucleus
Origin Nature
Positively charged Negatively charged Neutral Composition He
Photon
64 × 10kg 9.1 x 10 kg
Mass Charge +20 Chemical effect Affects
zero
zero
photo
photo Affects graphic plate .
Affectsphoto
graphic plate
graphic plate Effect of electric Deflected and magnetic
Deflected
No effect
cathode and join on haelegram @apna_channels

1. To produce electrical energy from the energy released during fission . 2 To produce different isotopes which can be used in medical , physical and agriculture science . Fast Breeder Reactor : A nuclear reactor which a produce more fissionable fuel than it consumes is called a fast breeder reactor . Nuclear Fusion : When two or more light nude combined together to form a heavier nucleus ; tremendo energy is released . This phenomenon is called nuder fusion . A typical example of nuclear fission is H® + H → He * + n + 17.6 MeV .
Isotones - Elements having same number of neutron but different atomic number are isotones . Nuclear Fission : The nuclear reaction in which a heavy nucleus splits into two nuclei of nearly equal mass is nuclear fission . The energy released in the nuclear fission is called nuclear energy . Nuclear fission was first demonstrated by Strassmann and O. Hahn . They found that when U225 nucleus is excited by the capture of a neutron , it splits into two nuclei Bali & K Chain Reaction : When uranium atom is bombarded with slow neutrons , fission takes place . With the fission of each uranium nucleus , on the average 3 neutrons and large energy is released . These neutrons cause further fission . Clearly a chain of fission of uranium nucleus starts which continues till whole of uranium is exhausted . This is called chain reaction . Chain reaction is of the following two types
1. Uncontrolled chain reaction
2. Controlled chain reaction . Uncontrolled Chain Reaction : In each fission reaction , three more neutrons are produced . These three neutrons may cause the fission of three other U235 nuclei producing 9
The energy released by sun and other stars is by nuclear fusion . For the nuclear fusion , a temperature of the order of 1 K is required . Hydrogen bomb : Hydrogen bomb was made by American scientists in 1952. This is based on nuclear fusio It is 1000 times more powerful than atom bomb . Mass Energy Relation : In 1905 Einstein establishe a relation between mass and energy on the basis of spe theory of relativity . According to this relation , mass be converted into energy and vice versa , according to t relation E = mc² where c is the velocity of light and E is t
neutrons and Thun Telegram @apria channels
As a result the
equivalent of

1. Intrinsic Semi - Conductor A semi conductor in an extremely pure form is known as intrinsic semi conductor . At absolute zero , an intrinsic semiconductor is a perfect insulator . ( conductivity = zero ) .
2. Extrinsic Semi - Conductor : If a measured and small amount of chemical impurity is added to intrinsic semi - conductor , it is called extrinsic semi - conductor or doped semi conductor . As a result of doping , there is large increase in its conductivity . > Extrinsic semi conductor are of two types : ( a ) : N type semi conductor : An extrionic semi conductor in which electrons are majority charge carrier is called N type semi conductor . Such a semi conductor is made by doping a pure semi conductor with pentavalent impurity like Arsenic , Antimony & Phosphorus . ( b ) P type semiconductor : An extrinsic semi conductor in which holes are the majority charge carrier is called a P type semiconductor.Such a semi conductor is made by doping a pure semi conductor with trivalent impurity like Gallium , Indium , Boron and Aluminium . Doping : Adding of chemical impurity to a pure semi conductor is called doping . The amount and type of impurity is closely controlled . Donor : Pentavalent impurities are called donor . Acceptor : Trivalent impurities are called acceptor The electrical conductivity of a semiconductor increases with the increase in temperature ... Rectifier : Rectifier is a device which converts alternating current into direct current . Nanotechnology : Study of science of small structure ( less than 100 nanometres ) is called nanotechnology . Solar cooker and solar PV ( Photo voltaic ) cell both receives energy directly from sun . Light emitting diodes works on the principle of electroluminescence . ( Combination of electrons and holes at the junction and release of energy )

19. Electronics
Electronics Electronics is the branch of physics and technology concerned with the behaviour and movement of electrons .
Electron Emission :
In metals , the electrons from the outermost orbit of atom become free at room temp . However these free electrons can not leave the surface of metals . For the free electrons to leave the metal surface , external energy is required . Electron emission can be achieved by the following methods . 1 : Thermionic Emission : by heating the metal .
Photo - electric emission : By illuminating the metal surface with light ( electromagnetic waves like ultraviolet rays ) of suitable frequency . The electrons so emitted are called photo electrons
3. Secondary emission : It is the electron emission when highly energetic electron beam is incident on a metal surface . The electron so emitted are called secondary electron . Field or cold emission : This is the process of electionona emission by applying a strong electric field across the metal surface . Diode Valve : Designed by J.
A. Fleming in 1904 , diode valve consists of two electrodes placed inside an evacuated glass envelope . One electrode is called cathode which is made up of tungsten on which there is a thin layer of barium oxide . When heated , cathode emits electrons . These electron flow towards the other electrode called anode or plate , which is at positive potential . As a result an electric current is established in the circuit .

20. Scientific Instruments
The electrons emitted from the cathode are collected in the space around it . This collection of electrons is called space charge which is obviously negative . Diode valve acts a rectifier . Rectifier is a device which converts alternating voltage ( current ) into direct voltage ( current ) . Triode Valve : Designed by Lee de Forest in 1907 , triode valve is a modified form of usual diode . It consists of a usual anode - cathode pair and one more electrode called control grid . > Triode valve can be used as amplifier , oscillator , transmitter and detector . Semi - conductor : Semi conductor are those materials whose electrical conductivity , at room temperature , lies in between that of insulator and conductor . Germenium and Silicon are two important semiconductor . In a crystal lattice of semi - conductor , some of the electrons become free from bond formation . At the sites of these electrons a deficiency of electron exists which acts as a virtual positive charge . These virtual positive charges are called holes . Semi - conductors
Use
Instrument Altimeter Ammeter
Measures altitudes ( used in aircraft ) Measures strength of electric current
Measures force and velocity of wind and directions
Anemometer
Measures intensity of sound
Audiometer
Continuous recording of atmospheric pressure
Barograph
Measures atmospheric pressure .
Barometer
To view distant objects
Binoculars .
To measure heat radiation
Bolometer
Measure inner and outer diameters of bodies Measures quantities of heat
Callipers Calorimeter
Cardiogram ( ECG ) Traces movements of the heart ; recorded on a Cardiograph
Determines heights , measurement of levels , etc. , In scientific experiments Determines longitude of a vessel at sea . Compares intensity of colours To change / reverse the direction of electric current , Also used to convert AC into DC
Cathetometer
Chronometer Colorimeter Commutator
are used in electron induston Telegram @apna_channels electroson

21. Inventions Inventor Country a
Photometer
Invention Adding machine .
160
France USA
Pascal
Polygraph
1933
Aeroplane Balloon
Wright brothers
Joseph France
and
Jacques
Montgolfier
Hungary
Ball - point pen Barometer
C. Biro
Pyknometer
Italy
E. Torricelli
Alessandro Volta
Italy
Battery
Scotland .
K. Macmillan J.B. Dunlop
Measures very high temperature . Measures altitudes and angles in navigation and astronomy To detect the direction and range of an approaching aeroplane by means of radiowaves , ( Radio Angle Detection and Range )
Bicycle
Pyrometer
Scotland
Bicycle Tyre
Quadrant
France
Calculating machine Pascal
Radar
France
Centrigrade scale A Celsius Cinematograph
USA
Thomas Alva Edison
Britain
Charles Babbage H
Radio microin on Telegram @apna_channels

22. Important Discoveries in Physics
Richard Trevithick
Locomotive .
England
1804
Discovery
Machine
Richard Gatling
1861
USA
gun ⠀
1687
Newton
Laws of motion
Match ( safety ) Microphone Microscope Mobile Phone Motor car ( petrol ) Motorcycle
☐ Sweden
J.E. Lurdstrom
+1855
Coulomb
1779
Law of electrostatic attraction Atom Photography ( On metal ) " Law of Electric resistance Law of floatation
David Hughes
1878
USA Netherlands 1590
1808
John Dalton
Z. Jansen
J. Neepse
1826
USA
Martin Kooper
.1970 Germany 1885 England 1884
1827
G.S. Ohm
Karl Benz
Archemedes
1827
Edward Butler
Michael Faraday
1831
Electromagnetic Induction
Neon - lamp
1915 1937 :
France USA
G. Claude
Photography ( On paper )
WV.Fox Talbot
1835
@apna
Nylon
Dr W.H. Carothers
Dynamite
Alfred Nobel
1867
Peniciline
Alexander Fleming
Scotland 1928
Mandeleev :
Periodic table
1888
Photography ( paper ) W.H. Fox Tablot
England 1835
Roentgen
X - Rays
1895
Printing press
Germany 1455
J. Gutenberg DrA.H.Taylor & L.C . Young USA "
Radioactivity
1896
Henry Becquerel
Radar
1922
Electron Radium
J.J.Thomson
1897
Radium
1898
France :
Marie and Pierre Curie
Madam Curie
1898
Radio
England 1901
G. Marconi
Max Plank
Quantum theory .
1900
Rayon
USA
American Viscose Co.
1910
Marconi .
Wireless Telegram
1901 :
Razor ( safety )
USA
K.G. Gillette
1895
Sir J. S. Fleming
Diode Bulb
1904
Razor ( electric )
Col. J. Schick
1931
USA
Photo electric effect
Albert Einstein
1905
Refrigerator
J. Harrison and
A. Catlin Britain
1834
Albert Einstein
Principle of Relativity
1905
Samuel Colt
Revolver
1835
USA
Lee de Forest
Triode Bulb
1906
Rubber ( vulcanized ) Charles Goodyear
USA
1841
Neil Bohr & Rutherford
Atomic Structure
1913
Rubber ( waterproof ) Charles Macintosh
Scotland 1819
Proton
Rutherford
1919
Safety lamp
Sir Humphrey Davy
England 1816
Raman Effect
CV Raman
1928
Safety pin
Walter Hunt
1849
USA
Neutron
James Chadwick
1932
Safety razor Sewing machine
USA
1901
King Camp Gillettė
Nuclear Reactor
Anrico Fermi
1942
1830
B. Thimmonnier
France
Law of electrolytic dissociation Thermionic emission
Faraday
Scooter
G. Bradshaw
England 1919
Edison
Ship ( steam )
J.C. Perier
1775 )
France

23. S.I. Units of Physical Quantity
Ship ( turbine )
1894
Sir Charles Parsons
Britain ,
Quantify
Symbol
Shorthand ( modem ) Sir Issac Pitmian
1837
Britain
Length
meter
Spinning frame
Sir Richard Arkwight
1769
England
Mass
kilogram
Spinning jenny
England 1764 Britain 1712 Scotland 1765
James Hargreaves
Time Work and Energy
second
Steam engine ( piston ) Thomas Newcome
joule
Steam :
engine Janies Watt
( condenser )
Electric current Temperature
ampere
Steel production Henry Bessemer
kelvin
England .
1855
Stainless Steel Homon Telegram @apna_channels

24. Conversion of Units from One System
Area
square meter
Another System
Cubic meter .
Volume

2.54 centimeter 1 grain

64.8 miligram
1 Inch
meter per second
Speed
$ 1.77 gm
1 Feet
1 dram .

0.3 meter
radian per second
Angular Velocity
rad s

28.35 gm
1 Yard

0.91 meter
1 ounce
Hertz .
Frequency

0.4537 kilogra
kilogram Square meter )

1.60 kilometer
kgm
1 Mile
1 pound
Moment of inertia
kilogram meter per second
220 yards
Momentum .
10 Newton
1 Furlong
1 dyne
newton second
impulse
1 Fathom

1.8 meter
1 poundal

0.1383 Newtor ,
kilogram square meter per second kgm²
Angular Momentum

20.11 meter

1. Chain
1 erg :
10 Joule
pascal
Pressure
1 Nautical mile 1.85 kilometer 10-10 meter
1 horse power 746 Watt
watt .
Power .
1 Angstrom
1 fathom
6 feet .
newton per meter
Surface tension
1 Square inch

6.45sq . centimeter 1 mile
8 furlong
newton second per square m . N.s.m
Viscosity
1 Square feet

0.09 square meter 1 mile
Thermal Conductivity watt permeter per degreecelcius Wm C
5280 feet
1 Square yard

0.83 square meter 1 nautical mile 6080 feet
Specific Heat capacity joule per kilogram per Kelvin Jkg
coulomb
Electric charge
1 Acre
104 sq . meter 1 feet
12 inch
volt
Potential Difference
1 Square mile

2.58 sq . kilometer 1 yard
3 feet . 37 ° centigrade 98.6 ° Fahrentz
الجوية
ohm .
Electric Resistance
1 Cubic inch

16.38 cubic
' them .
farad
Electrical Capacity
centimeter 0.028 cubic meter 0.7 cubic meter 1000 cubic : centimeter
henry
Magnetic Induction
1 Cubic feet 1 Cubic yard 1 Litre
50 ° centigrade 122 ° Fahrenhe -40 ° Fahrenheit -40 ° Centigra 32 ° Fahrenheit 0 ° Centigrade
weber
Magnetic Flux
Luminous Flux or lumen
photometric power
of lux
Intensity
1 Pint

0.56 litre
Illumination
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Introduction
Water exists in three different states .
Chemistry is the branch of science which deals with the composition of matter and also the Physical and Chemical characteristics associated with the different material objects . A French chemist , Lavoisier ( 1743-1793 ) is regarded as father of modern chemistry .
1. Substance and its nature : Anything that occupies space , possesses mass and can be felt by any one or more of our senses is called matter . Early Indian Philosophers classified matter in the form of five basic elements the " Panch Tataya " -air , earth , fire , sky and water . According to them everything , living or non- living was made up of these five basic elements . Ancient . Greek Philosophers had arrived at a similar classification of matter . Indian sage Maharishi Kanada was perhaps the first to suggest that all forms of matter are composed of very small i.e. , tiny particles known as anu and each anu may be made up of still smaller particles called parmanu . Greek thinker Domocritus named these tiny particles parmanu as atoms ( from the Greek word atomos meaning uncut ) . Thus matter is composed of tiny particles known as atoms .
Heat Water
Heat
Vapour
Ice ( Solid )
Cool .
Cool
( Gas )
( Liquid )
The three states of matter are Solid , liquid and Gaseous state . The fourth state of matter is plasma state and fifth state of matter Bose - Einstein Condensation state . Plasma state : Plasma state consists of super energetic and super excited particles . These particles are in the form of ionised gases . Plasma can occur when matter is heated to a very high temperature . The matter in plasma state is a collection of free highly energetic and highly excited electrically charged particles .. The fluorescent tubes and neon sign bulbs contain inert gases , when electric current is passed through them , they produce glowing plasma , having a characteristic colour depending upon the nature of the gas . It is the plasma that makes CFL tube glow .
presence of
Bose - Einstein Condensation State : In 1920 , on the basis of statistical calculation , relative abundance Satyendra Nath Bose gave the concept of fifth @apna_merican state of matter . Latter
com in the earth crust
Elements Oxygen : Silicon
in Earth Crust

46.6 27.7
Matter
Scientists
succeeded in obtaining Aluminium
this state . The Bose- Einstein state is formed
Physical classification
Chemical classification
Iron :
Calcium

3.6
by supercooling a gas of extremely low density , about
☑ Liquid state
Potassium

2.8
Solid state
Gaseous state
Magnesium
2 : 1
one hundred thousandth of the
Hydrogen

0.14
Pure Substances
Mixture
Phosphorous

0.12
density of normal air , to ..
super low temperature . This process is known as Bose- Einstein condensation and this state of matter is known as Bose - Einstein Condensate ( BEC ) or Bose - Einstein
Element
Compound Homogeneous Hetrogeneous
Condensation State .
Metallic
Metalloids Non - metallic
· Pure substances ; A single substance ( or matter ) which can not be separated into other kinds of matter by any physical process is called pure substance . ‹ Pure substances have been classified as elements and compounds . *
Inorganic Solid State : A solid possesses definite shape and definite volume which means that it can not be compressed on applying pressure . Solids are generally hard and rigid . Example — metals , wood , bricks , copper etc. Liquid State : A liquid possesses definite volume but no definite shape . This means that the liquid can take up the shape of container in which it is placed . Example - water , milk , oil , alcohol etc. Gaseous State : A gas does not have either a definite volume or definite shape . It can be compressed to large extent on applying pressure and also takes the shape of the container where it is enclosed . Examples - Air , Oxygen , Nitrogen , Ammonia , Carbondioxide etc.
Organic :
Elements The simplest form of a pure substance which can neither be broken into nor built from simpler substances by ordinary physical and chemical methods is called element . Example - Gold , Silver , Hydrogen etc. Elements are further classified into three types
1. Metals
2. Non - metals and
3. Metalloids . Metals : Metals are solids ( exception mercury which is liquid at room temperature ) are normally hard . They have . lustre , high melting point ( mp ) and boiling point ( bp ) and also good conductor of electricity and heat . The conductivity of metal decreases with increase in temperature due to vibration of positive ions at their Lattice points . Examples Iron , Copper , Silver , Gold , Aluminium , Zinc etc. Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Heat
Heat
Solid State
Vapour state
Liquid State

2. Filtration : This is a process for quick and comp removal of suspended solid particles from a liqu by passing the suspension through a filter pape Examples
1. removal of solid particles from the eng oil in car engine .
2. filtration of tea from tea leaves int preparation of tea ctc .
3. Evaporation : The process of conversion of a liquid its vapours at room temperature is called evaporation . Evaporation causes cooling . Example
1. Evaporatio of water in summer from Ponds , wells & lakes
2. Preparation of common salt from sea water by evaporation of water . During Summer , water kept in a earthen pot become cool because of the evaporation .
4. Crystallization : This method is mostly used f separation and purification of solid substances . E this process , the impure solid or mixture is heated with suitable solvent ( e.g. alcohol , water , acetor chloroform ) to its boiling point and the hot solutio is filtered . The clear filtrate is cooled slowly to roc temperature , when puresolid crystallizes out . This is separated by filtration and dried .
Metalloids Metalloids are the elements which have common properties of both metals and non - metals . Examples - Arsenic , Oxygen Antimony , Bismuth etc.
Approximate percentage of elements in human body Elements Percentage
Carbon
Compounds Compounds Hydrogen are pure substances that are composed oftwoormoredifferent
10 .
Nitrogen Calcium
elements in fixed proportion by mass . The properties of a Phosphorous compound are entirely different Potassium from those of the elements from Sodium :
which it is made . Example Chlorine Water , Sugar , Salt , chloroform , Alcohol , Ether etc.
Magnesium
Iron 0.0004
Compounds are classified- into two types-

1. Organic Compounds : The Compounds obtained from living sources are called organic compounds . The term organic is now applied to hydrocarbons and their derivatives . Examples Carbohydrates , Proteins , Oils , Fats etc. Inorganic Compounds : The Compounds obtained from non - living sources such as rocks and minerals
For the separation of more complex mixtures , fractiona ! crystallization is used , in which the components of the mixtures crystallize out at different interval of time . Distillation : It is a process of converting a liquid int its vapour by heating and then condensing the vapor
5 .
are called inorganic compounds . Examples - Commo_kiran again into the same liquid by cooling . Thus , distillation
Salt , Marble , Washing Soda etc. Mixtures : A material obtained by mixing two or more substances in any indefinite proportion is called a mixture . The properties of the components in a mixture remain unchanged . Example - Milk , Sea water , Petrol , Paint , Glass , Cement , Wood etc. There are two types of mixture-
1. Homogeneous mixture and .
2. Heterogeneous mixture . Homogeneous mixture : A mixture is said to be homogeneous if it has a uniform composition through out and there are no visible boundaries of separation between constituents . More over , the constituents can not be seen even by a microscope . Examples - Common salt dissolved in water , sugar dissolved in water , iodine dissolved in CC , benzene in toluene and methyl alcohol in water .
involves vaporisation and condensation both
Distillation Vaporisation + Condensation This method is employed to separate the liquids whic have different boiling points or a liquid from no volatile solid or solids either in solution or suspension . Example A mixture of copper sulphate and wate or a mixture of water ( B.P 100 ° C ) and methyl alcohi ( B.P 45 ° C ) can be separated by this method . 6. Fractional distillation : This process is similar to the distillation process except that a fractionating columns used to separate two or more volatile liquid which hav different boiling points . Example - 1 . Methyl alcoh ( bp = 338 K ) and acetone ( bp = 329 K ) can be separata by fractional distillation process .
2. Separation petrol , diesel oil , kerosene oil , heavy oil etc from cru petroleum .
3. Separation of oxygen , nitrogen int gasses and carbon dioxide from liquid air etc. 7. Chromatography : The name chromatography derived from Latin word ' Chroma ' meaning colour . The technique of chromatography is based on the different in the rates at which the components of a mixture as absorbed in the suitable absorbent . There are many types of chromatography . ( a ) Column ( absorption ) Chromatography ( b ) Thin layer chromatography ( c ) Paper chromatography
Heterogeneous mixture : A mixture is said to be heterogeneous if it does not have a uniform composition throughout and has visible boundaries of separation between the various constituents . The different constituents of the heterogeneous mixture can be seen even with naked eye . Example - A mixture of Sulphur . & Sand , A mixture of Iron filings & Sand etc. Separation of mixture : Some methods of separation of mixtures are given below-
1. Sublimation : Sublimation is a process of conversion of a solid into vapour without passing through the liquid state and this method can be used for the substances
( d ) High pressure liquid chromatography ( e ) Ion - exchange chromatography @apnarchannels whidein on hologram @apna channels Ⓒpmeiomepra

2. The first letter along with one more letter of English name of an element— .
Symbol Name
Name
Helíum
Neon
Liquid Water Ethan
Nickel
Magnesium
Ethanol Chloroform Acetone . 78.3 ° C 62 ° C 46 ° C The boiling point decreases with decrease in atmospheric pressure . Soluble impurities increases the boiling point of liquid . ( c ) Freezing Point : The constant temperature at which a liquid changes into a solid by giving out heat energy is
Aluminium
Manganese
100 ° C
[ B.P.
[ Calcium
Argon
Chromiun
Cobalt
Chlorine
Zinc
Radium Radium
Platinum

3. One or two letters of the Latin name of an element-
called freezing point of that liquid . F.P of water = 0 ° @ apnakir ( d ) Evaporation : The process of conversion of a liquid into its vapours at room temperature is called evaporation . Evaporation causes cooling . Actually , during evaporation , the molecules having higher kinetic energy escape from the surface of the liquid . Therefore , average kinetic energy of the rest of the molecules decreases . Therefore cooling takes place during evaporation because temperature of liquid is directly proportional to average kinetic Energy . Evaporation is affected by following factors ,
1. Nature of liquid
2. Temperature 3.Surface area . ( e ) Vapourpressure : The pressure exerted by the vapours of ☑liquid in equilibrium with liquid at a given temperature is called vapour pressure . Vapour pressure depends upon — 1 , its nature and
2. temperature . Higher the vapour pressure of a particular liquid lesser will be the magnitude of intermolecular forces present in molecules . Vapour pressure of a liquid increases with increase in temperature . Condensation ( Liquefaction ) : Condensation is the process of change of a substance from its gaseous to liquid state at a particular temperature . On cooling , the gas particles lose their kinetic energy . So , motion of particles slows down and they come very close to one another and ultimately they are liquefied .
2. Chemical Symbol ; Formula and Equation . Chemical Symbol - A symbol is an abbreviation for the name of an element . Dalton was the first Scientist to use the symbols for elements in a very specific sense . Berzelius suggested that
English Name
Symbol
Latin Nam
Sodium Potassium : Iron Copper Silver
Natrium
Kalium
Ferrum
Cuprium .
Argentum
Tin
Stannum
Gold
Aurum Plumbum Hydrargyrum
Lead .
Mercury
Chemical Formulae .
The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition . We know that the combining power ( or capacity ) of an element is known as its valency . Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom ( s ) of another element to form a chemical compound .
Examples :

1. To write chemical formula of hydrogen chloride , we first write symbol of hydrogen and chlorine with their valencies and then after exchanging of their valencies we find chemical formula of hydrogen chloride .
Hydrogen H
Chlorine CI
Element Symbol Valency
Chemical formula of hydrogen chloride = H₁CI₁ = HCI . Formula of hydrogen sulphide .
Sulphur
Hydrogen
Element Symbol
Valency
the symbols of elements he made in Telegram @apha channels
sulphide
HS .

13. Nitrite
NO .
14 Chlorite
CIO .
CIO :

15. Hypochlorite , 16. Chlorate
CIO
novalent electropositive :
CIO :
17 Perchlorate
monium
Aurous ( Gold ( 1 ) }
AIO

18. Meta - aluminate
Argentous ( Silver ( I ) ]
Divalent electronegative
Cuprous ( Copper ( ) )

1. Carbonate
Hydrogen
Cr₂02-
Dichromate

6. Lithium
Oxide
7 : Sodium

4. Peroxide

5. Potassium

9. Mercurous Mercury ( 1 ) } Divalent electroposit

5. Sulphate

6. Sulphite 7. Sulphide 8. Silicate
Argentic [ Silver ( II } }
12 : Barium
Sio
13 Calcium
Cupric ( Copper ( II ) ]

9. Thiosulphate

5. Ferrous [ Iron ( I ) ) :
ZnO
Zincate
1 2 0 8 2 3 x 3 4 = 2 × Z

6. Magnesium
PbO

11. Plumbite .. 12 Stannate ..
Manganese
SnO
Mercuric ( Mercury ( II ) }
MnO

13. Manganate
2 2 3 3
10 Nickel-
CrO2
144 Chromate
10 Plumbous ( Lead ( II ) } · 11 Platinous ( Platinum ( II ) ) .
( COO ) ,

15. Oxalate
Stannous ( Tin ( I ) }
Trivalent electronegative
AsO
1 Arsenate
Zinc :
2 Nitride
Trident electropositives
AIO

3. Aluminate :
Aluminium
2 Arsenic

4. Arsenite
Au³

3. Auric [ Gold ( IN )

5. Phosphide
Bi³
Bismuth

6. Phosphite

5. Chromium
7 Phosphate
6 Ferric ( Iron ( III )
8 Borate
Teravalent electropositive
Tetravalent electronegative
Plumbic ( Lead ( TV ) }

1. Carbide
[ Fe ( CN ) } ] ]

2. Platinic ( Platinium ( IV ) )

2. Ferrocyanide
Chemical Equation

3. Stannic [ Tin ( IV ) )
A Chemical equation is the symbolic representationd a chemical reaction using the symbols and formulae of the substances involved in the reaction .
common electrovalent ve ions ( acid radicals ) Monovalent electronegative
Acetate
CHCOO
For example Burning of Coal in air is a chemis reaction in which new substance , Carbon dioxide is form The reaction can be represented by either a word equati or a chemical equation ( using formulae and symbols ) . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
HCO
Bicarbonate or Hydrogen carbonate
Bisulphide or Hydrogen sulphide

2. Write the symbols or formulae of the products on the right hand side , with a ( + ) sign between them ..
: 10 .
Heat
2Pb ( NO ) , ( 5 ) Lead nitrate
2PbO ( s ) + NO₂ ( 2 ) + O₂ ( 8 )

3. Put the sign of an arrow ( → ) in between the reactants side and product side .
4. The gaseous , liquid , aqueous and solid states of reactants and products are represented by the notation ( g ) , ( 1 ) , ( aq ) and ( s ) respectively . ☑Magnesium ribbon burns with a dazzling white Rame changes into a white powder . The white powder is magnesium oxide . This can be written in chemical equation
Lead

11. White silver chloride turns grey in sunlight . This is due to the decomposition of silver chloride into silver and chlorine by light .
Sunlight
ZAgCl ( s )
2Ag ( s ) + C

12. Silver bromide also behaves in same way .
Sanlight
2Ag ( s ) + Br , ( g ) .
2AgBr ( s )
This reaction is used in black and white photography .
Mg ( s ) + O2 ( g ) MgO ( s ) Some important chemical equations are following-
1. 3 Fe ( s ) + 4H₂O ( g ) Fe₂O ( s ) + 4H₂ ( g ) : CH₂OH ( 1 )
Rancidity
A substance is said to be rancid when there is a change in smell , taste and colour . When fats and oils are oxidised , they become rancid and their smell and taste change . Therefore . substances which prevent oxidation ( antioxidants ) are added to foods containing fats and oils . Keeping food in air tight containers helps to slow down oxidation . Chips : manufacturers use flush bags of chips with nitrogen gas to
340 atm
2 CO ( g ) + 2H2 ( g )
Methyl alcohol
.Sunlight

3. 6CO2 ( g ) + 12H₂O ( 1 ) Chlorophyll C6H120 ( aq ) +
Glucose @apna · 602 ( aq ) + 6H₂O ( l ) .
ran
prevent the chips from oxidation .
Corrosion

4. Calcium oxide react vigorously with water molecule to produce slaked lime ( Calcium hydroxide ) releasing a large amount of heat . ****** CaO ( s ) + H₂O ( 1 ) Ca ( OH ) , ( aq ) + Heat ex
When a metal is attacked by substances around it such as moisture , acid etc. it is said to corrode and this process is called corrosion . The black coating on silver and green coating on copper are example of corrosion : Corrosion slowly coats the surface of metallic objects with oxides or other salts of the metal . Iron articles are shiny when new , but they get coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time . This process is commonly known as rusting of iron . Rust is hydrated ferric oxide ( Fe , O , .xH₂O ) . Corrosion causes damage to car bodies , bridges , iron railing , ships and to all objects made of metals specially those . of iron ..
Quick lime
* slaked lime
A solution of slaked lime produced by above reaction is used for white washing walls . Calcium hydroxide " reacts slowly with carbon dioxide in air to form a thin layer of calcium carbonate or walls . Calcium carbonate is formed after two to three days of whitewashing and gives a shiny finish to the walls . ***** Ca ( OH ) , ( aq ) + CO₂ ( g ) CaCO3 ( s ) + H₂O ( 1 ) Calcium hydroxide Calcium carbonate Reactions in which heat is given out along with the formation of products are called exothermic reactions . Burning of natural gas is an example of exothermic

3. Atomic Structure
Dalton's Atomic Theory
In 1803 to 1808 atomic theory had been given by john Dalton . The main points of Dalton's atomic theory are-
1. Elements consist of minute , indivisible , indestructible particles called atoms .
reaction .
➤ CO₂ ( g ) + 2H₂O ( 8 )
✨✨ CH¸ ( g ) +20 , ( g )
Atoms of an element are identical to each other . They have samé mass and size .
Respiration is an exothermic process . We need energy to stay alive . We get this energy from the food we eat . During digestion , food is broken down into simpler substances . For example - rice , potatoes and bread contain carbohydrates . These carbohydrates are broken down to form glucose . This glucose combines with oxygen in the cells of our body and provide energy . The special name of this reaction is respiration
Atoms of different elements differ in properties and have different mass and sizes . Atoms can not be created , destroyed or transformed * into atoms of other elements . Atom : The smallest particle of an element is called an atom . An atom can take part in chemical combination and does not occur free in nature . The atom of the hydrogen is the smallest and lightest . Example - Na , K , Ca , H etc. Join on Telegram @apna_channels
3 .

4. The charge / mass for a neutron is zero : 5. Aneutronwas obtained from radioactivity phenomenon .
Molecule A molecule is the smallest particle of an elementor compound that can have a stable and independent existence . Example - 02 , N2 , C₁₂ , P₂ , S. etc. Mole : A mole is a collection of 6.023 x1023 particles . It means that 1 mole = 6.023 × 1023 ( just like 1 pair = 2 ) 1 mole atom = 6.023 × 1023 atoms 1 mole molecule = 6.023 × 1023 molecules ... Avogadro's Number : The number 6.023 x 1023 is called Avogadro's Number . " If there is one million Mg2 + ions in MgCl , then number of Clions will be two millions . Atomic Mass : The atomic mass of an element is a number which states that how many times the mass of one atom of an element is heavier than 1 th mass of one atom of carbon - 12 .
Be + He a - particle
12 6 "
Atomic number ( Z ) : The number of proton or electron in an atom of the element is called atomic number . It is denoted by Z. Zep where , e = no . of electrons and p = no . of protons . According to Mosley's law atomic number of an element is more fundamental property than its atomic mass . Mass number ( A ) : The sum of number of protons and neutrons in an atom of the element is called mass number . It is denoted by
A. A = p + where , p = no . of protons and n = no . of
neutrons
mass of one atom of the element-
23 .
Atomic mass of an element :
Let , 11ª .
xmass of one atom of carbon - 12
In Na , Z = 11 , A = 23 and , e = 11 , p = 11 n = A - p = 23 – 11 = 12
Actual mass of 1 atom of an element =
atomic mass in ' amu × 1.66 × 10-24 g Molecular mass : The molecular mass of a substance is a number which states that how many times mass one molecule of a substance is heavier in comparison to 1 th mass of one atom of Carbon - 12 .
Let , 1 / 2C
Z = 6 , A = 12 , e = 6 , p = 6 , n = A - Z = 12-6 = 6 Isotopes : These are atoms of the elements having the samė atomic number but different mass number . Isotopes of Carbon - 12C , 13 C , 14C 6 : 2 : 6 " 6 Isotopes of hydrogen are H , H and ³H and named as @apna_kiprotium , deuterium and Tritium respectively . Tritium
" Constituents of an atom : Fundamental particles of an atom are Electron , Proton & Neutron .
Electron : ( c )
1 Electron had been discovered by J.J. Thomson .
The name of electron was given by Stoney .
2 .
is radioactive isotope of hydrogen . > Isotopes of chlorine are 35Cl₁ , and 37C₁₁7

3. The relative charge on electron is - 1 unit and its absolute charge is -1.6 × 10-19 . coulomb or - 4.8 × 10 −.10 e.s.u. ( electrostatic unit ) ·
4. The relative mass of an electron is 0.000543 amu and its absolute mass is 9.1 × 10-28 g or 9.1 × 10-31 x kg . The charge / mass ( e / m ) ratio of an electron is- 1.76 × 108 Coulomb
'17
In isotopes number of protons and electrons are same but number of neutrons are different . Isobars : These are atoms of the elements having the same mass number but different atomic numbers . e.g.
40 Ar , 40K , 18 19 .
40 .20
gram

6. An electron was obtained from Cathode rays
Isotones : These are atoms of different elements having the same number of neutrons .
experiments . Proton : ( P )
14C , 15 , 160
A proton had been discovered by Goldstein
2. A proton was named by Rutherford .
3. The relative charge on proton is +1 unit and its absolute charge is + 1.6 × 10-19 Coulomb or + 4.8 × 100 e.s.u.
4. The relative mass of proton is 1.00763 amu and its absolute mass is 1.673 × 10-24 gram or 1.673 × 10-27 kg . The charge / mass ( e / m ) ratio for a proton is = 9.58 × 10 Coulomb
8 '
Isoelectronic : These are atoms / molecules / ions containing the same number of electrons .

1. , 0²- , F˜ , Ne , Na + , Mg2 +
2. CN- , N2 , 0₂ + etc. When a helium atom loses two electrons it becomes ! positively charged helium ion He - 2e → He ** This doubly positively charged He ** is called alpha ( particle .
Thomson's model of an atom : According to Thomson , an atom is treated as sphere of radius 10 in which positively charged particles are uninformal distributed and negatively charged electrons are embedd through them . This is also called Plum - Pudding model of atom or water - melon model of an atom ..
gram

6. An proton was obtained from anode rays experiment : Neutron ( n )
1. A neutron had been discovered by James Chadwick . Charge on neutron is zero 3 The relative mass of neutron is 1.00863 amu and its absolute mass is 1.675 × 1024 gram or 1,675 x 10 kg . d its Join on Telegram
Rutherford's model of an atom :: On the basis scattering experiment , Rutherford proposed a model of atem which is known as nuclear atomin mod

3. Wave number ( v ) : The number of wavelengths which can be accommodated in one centimeter length along the direction of propagation is called wave number . It is denoted by v . The SI unit of vis m and CGS unit . is cm - 1
Wave number ( v ) =
wave length ( 1 )

4. The relation between velocity of light ( c ) , frequency ( v ) and wavelength ( A ) is
Where , c . 3 × 10 % m / sec
c = v ) .
or , c = 3 x 100 cm / sec
Different types of electromagnetic waves ( or radiation ) differ with respect to wavelength or frequency . The wavelength of electromagnetic spectrum increases in the following order . Cosmic rays < -rays < X - rays < Ultraviolet rays < Visible < Infrared < Microwaves < Radiowaves . Planck's quantum theory of Radiations : In 1900 Max Planck put forward a theory which is known as Planck's quantum theory . According to this theory radiant energy is emitted or absorbed in the form of small energy packets , called quanta . In case of light , these energy packets are known as photons . The energy of each quantum is directly proportional to the frequency of radiation ..
i.e. E α v or , E = hy = = hcv
apna_kiran
SI unit of his metre ( m ) and CGS unit is centimetre ( cm ) . 1A = 10-10 m , 1 µ ( micron ) = 10 % m , 1 nm = 10-9 m , 1 pm = 10-12 m , "
Where h is called Planck's constant . Its value is 6 : 626 × 10-34 Js and c is the velocity of light ( c = 3 × 10³ m / s ) . Spectrum : When white light is allowed to pass through a prism , it splits into seven colours . The seven coloured band . is called spectrum .
Frequency ( v ) : The number of waves passing through a point in one second is called frequency . It is denoted
mic rays :
Red O # Orange Yu Yellow Ga Green 3 Blue
Ly - rays ..
+ X - rays
Uv - rays
Visible
VLBGYOR
rays
FIR
1 Indigo Va Violet
Microwave · Radiowave
Zeeman's effect : When spectral lines obtained from atomic spectra are placed in a magnetic field , they are splitted : Into number of fine lines , this is called Zeeman's effect . Stark's effect : When spectral lines obtained from atomic spectra is placed in electric field , they are splitted into number of fine lines this is called Stark's effect . Thomson's model
Photoelectric Effect
When radiations with certain minimum frequency strike the surface of a metal , the electrons are ejected from the surface of the metal . This phenomenon is called photoelectric effect . The electrons emitted are called photoelectrons . Quantum Number The set of four integers requires to define an electron . completely in an atom are called quantum number .
1. Principal quantum number ( n ) : It describes the shape , size and energy of the shell to which electron belong . It is denoted by n , where ,
Plum pudding model ( watermelon model )
Rutherford's model
Nuclear theory
Bohr's model
Concept of Quantization of energy . Planck's Quantum theory Photon & quanta Sommerfield's model
Orbital ; elliptical & spherical
n = 1,2,3,4 = 12,3,4 . Value of n
de - Broglie's equation
Dual nature of electron de
Helsenberg's Uncertainty Exact position & momentum canhot be … .
determined simultaneously Schrodinger's wave equation wave nature of electron
Principle
Designation of Shell KLMNO
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

2. According to Mendeleev's periodic law , the isotop must be given separate places in periodic table , since they have different atomic masses . But they were not assigned separate places .
3. Elements such as copper , and silver bear no resemblan with alkali metals ( Li , Na , K , Rb , Cs ) but they have be eplaced together

4. Periodic classification of Elements Father of periodic table - Mendeleev . The arrangement of the known elements in certain groups in such a way so that the elements with similar properties are grouped together is known as classification
Elements which are chemically similar such as gold and of elements Join on Telegram @apha channels groups ………
separate

5. Chemical Bonding
The force that holds together the different atoms in a molecule is called chemical bond . There are many types of chemical bond .
1. Ionic bond or ( Electrovalent bond ) : A bond formed by the complete transfer of one or more electrons from one atom to other atom is called ionic bond . Example- ( a ) . Formation of NaCl :
H - Cl , H - O - H , H - N - H Co - ordinate bond ( or Dative bond ) : Co - ordinate bond is a special type of covalent bond in which one atom donates electrons to other atom . The bonding between donor to acceptor atom is called co - ordinate bond . It is denoted by Example
Nat Cl
Na +
Condition of ionic bond : Ionization energy of metal should be low and Electron affinity of non - metal should be high . Properties of ionic compounds : ( a ) Ionic compounds have high melting point & boiling . point .
Ö :
: 25 :
OS O
Ammonium chloride ( NH , CI ) has all the three types of bond i.e. ionic , covalent and co - ordinate bond . Sigma bond ( o - bond ) : A bond formed by the linear overlapping of atomic orbitals is called sigma bond . Since , extent of overlapping of atomic orbitals in o - bond in largerHence o - bond is a strong bond .
Ionic compounds are good conductor of electricity in molten state or in water .
( b ) .
ionic compounds are bad conductor of electricity nona kira
( c )
. solid state .
Ionic compounds are soluble in water . ( e ) Ionic compounds are insoluble in non - polar solvent like Benzene , Carbon tetrachloride etc. Common salt ( NaCl ) is Soluble in water . It means that in this case hydration energy released by water is more than from lattice energy of sodium chloride ( NaCl ) . Covalent bond : A bond formed between two same or different atoms by mutual contribution and sharing of electrons is called covalent bond . Example-
( d )
Pi - bond ( π - bond ) : A bond formed by the sidewise or lateral overlapping of atomic orbitals is called pi - bond . since , in this case , extent of overlapping of atomic orbitals is lesser than o - bond . So , л - bond is a weak bond .
It '
HH ; O 10 ; N
Hybridisation : The phenomenon of mixing of two or more atomic orbitals of equivalent energies to form new type of identical number of orbitals is called hybridisation and new type of orbitals obtained are called hybrid orbitals . Hybrisation Geometry ( Structure / Bond Angle ) Linear / 180 ° Trigonal / 120 °
( a ) . H₂ molecule : ( H
: 0 :
( b ) Cl₂ molecule
Tetrahedral / 109 ° 28 ' Trigonal bipyramidal / 120 ° / 90 ° Octahedral / 90 ° Pentagonal bipyramidal / 72 ° , 90 °
Lone pair of electrons : The pair of electrons which do not take part in covalent bond formation are called Lone pair of electrons For example There is one Lone pair in ammonia ( NH ) and two Lone pair in water ( H2O )
sp³d²
sp³d³
Bond energy : The amount of energy required to break one mole bonds of a particular type between the atoms in the gaseous state of a substance is called bond energy . bond energy depends upon the following factors . 1 Size of atom ..
The
N- H

2. Multiplicity of bonds .
Properties of covalent compounds : ( a ) Covalent compounds have high mp . & b.p. ( b ) They are generally bad conductor of electricity ( exception graphite ) .
Greater the size of atoms , lesser will be bond energy . Greater the bond multiplicity , more will be bond energy Bond energy : Single bond < double bond < triple bond Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Size of atoms
2. Multiplicity of bonds .
3 .
Greater the size of atoms , greater will be bond length . Greater the multiplicity of bonds , lesser will be bond ength . ✓ Hydrogen bond : When hydrogen atom is present between two most electronegative atoms ( N , O , F ) then it is bonded to one by a covalent bond and to other by a weak force of attraction which is called hydrogen bond . etc. It is denoted by ...... Example
( reduction of CL )
Cu + CO ( reduction of CuO )
Hg , C₁₂ ( reduction of HgC₁₂ )
2FeCl2 + 2HC1
2FeC₁₂ + H₂
( reduction of FeCl₁ ) :
Modern conceptofoxidation and Reduction : According to modern concept , loss of electrons is called oxidation whereas gain of electrons is called reduction . Example :
H - FH - FH - F H - OH - OH - O ...
( oxidation of Na )
Nat
( oxidation of Zn )
Zn +20

3. H2O is liquid due to formation of hydrogen bond . H₂S does not form hydrogen bond . So , it is gas at room temperature .
4. In water each H₂O molecule is surrounded by four other H2O molecules by hydrogen bond . It means that maximum number of hydrogen bond in a H₂O molecule is four . In water molecule each oxygen atom is surrounded by two H₂O molecule with hydrogen bonds . There are two type of hydrogen bonding
1. Intermolecular hydrogen bond .
( reduction of C₁₂ )
201
Ch 2e
( reduction of S ) :
Oxidising agent ( O.A. ) : A substance which undergoes reduction is called oxidising agent CuO + C →→ Cu + CO Oxidation - C , Reduction - CuO , Oxidising agent - CuO Other examples Oy , O₁ H₂O KMnO̟ KC₁₂O , etc. Reducing agent ( RA . ) A substance which undergoes oxidation is called reducing agent .

2. Intramolecular hydrogen bond @ apna_kiran H₂O + C Intermolecular hydrogen bond arises when hydrogen bonding occurs between two or more molecules . In this case m.p. & b.p. of compound increases due to molecular association .
→→ CO + H₂
Oxidation - C , Reduction - H , O ,
Reducing agent C
Other examples - H , CO , HS , SO . , C , SnCL , etc. Redox Reaction : A reaction in which both oxidation . and reduction takes place simultaneously is called redox reaction .. Example CuO + C __ > Cu + CO Oxidation - C , Reduction - Cuo
... H FH - F …… ... H - F … ... When hydrogen bonding occurs within a molecule then it is called intramolecular hydrogen bonding . Due to . cyclisationm.p . & b.p.of the compound decreases in this case .
H ...
Oxidation number ( O.N. ) : The charge present on atom in a molecule or ion is called oxidation number . It may be
Due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding between zero , positive or negative . alcohol and water , alcohol is soluble in water .
Rules for determination of oxidation number :
1. Oxidation number of an atom in free state is zero
2. Oxidation number of alkali metals ( Li , Na , K , Rb , Cs ) in molecule is always +1
3. Oxidation number of alkaline earth metals ( Be , Mg , Ca , Sr , Ba ) in a molecule is always +2
4. Oxidation number of hydrogen
CH3-
Methyl alcohol
Water

6. Oxidation & Reduction ** Oxidation ( old concept ) : Oxidation is a process which involves either of the following-
1. addition of oxygen -
2. removal of hydrogen
3. addition of electro negative element or group
4. removal of electro positive element or group . 2MgO ( oxidation of Mg ) 2HCl + S ( oxidation of HLS ) FeS ; ( oxidation of Fe )
( +1 ) hydrogen ion ( -1 ) hydride ion ( -2 ) oxide - ( - 1 ) peroxide superoxide

5. Oxidation number of Oxygen

6. Sum of Oxidation number of atoms in a molecule is equal to zero . Sum of oxidation number of atoms in a ion is equal to 2KI + Hgoikon Telegram @ aphá channels

7. Solution
A homogeneous mixture of two or more pure non reacting substances whose composition can be varied within certain limits is called solution . When solution is composed of only two components , it is called binary solution . For example solution of NaCl in water . Similarly solution containing three components is called ternary solution . For example a solution of NaCl and KCl in water . In binary solution , there are two components- 1 , Solute and 2 , Solvent The component which is in smaller proportion of amount in solution is called solute while one present in excess is called solvent . For example In a binary solution of sugar in water , acts as solute while water is the solvents .
x + 1 × 4 = + 1 x = 41-4 x = -3 "
Cations are formed by loss of electron Na ( g ) -e → Na * ( g ) Mg ( g ) -2e - Mg ** ( g ) Anions are formed by gain of electron
Cl ( g ) + e → Cl¯ ( g ) O ( g ) + 2e - 0² ( g ) . Types of Reactions i Decomposition reactions
When a Single reactant breaks down to give simple products , it is known as decomposition rection . 2FeSO , ( s ) Heat , Fe₂O₂ ( s ) + 50₂ ( g ) +503 ( 8 )
sugar
The better solvent is one which has high dielectric constant . Water is universal solvent because it has high dielectric constant . On the basis of States of matter binary solution is
CaCO , ( s ) Heat , CaO ( s ) + CO₂ ( 8 ) Calcium oxide is called lime or quick lime which is used in the manufacture of cement .
classified as : ☐ Naturo Naturo
Solute Golvent
Bomples
Sunlight
2 Ag ( s ) + Cl₂ ( g ) .
2AgCl ( s )
Gas Solid
Hydrogen in palladium
Solid Solution
Liquid Solid
Mercury in Zinc amalgam
Combination reactions
Solid Solid
Various alloys .
When two or more substances combine to form a single product , the rections are called combination rections .
Gas
Gas
Liquid Solution 1st bolli
Liquid Aerated water ( CO + HO !
Alcohol in water
( 1 ) Burning of coal c « Joingon
Liquid Liquid
water
Join on Telegram @apna channels

4. Conc . H₂SO , and HNO3 is used to wash iron for its galvanization .
5 .
Oxalic acid is used to remove rust spot .
6 .
Boric acid is a constituent of eye wash .
7 .
Formic acid is present in red ants .
Uric acid is present in urine of mammals Strength of acids
Strong acid ( completely ionised in water ) HCI , HNO̟¸ , H₂SO ,
Weak acid
( partially ionised in water CHCOOH , H , CO , HCOOH
Classification of acids
Hydra acids NH HS , HC , HBr , HF
Oxy acids :
HNO , H₂SO , HCIO , HIO
Basicity of an acid : The number of removable hydrogen ions from an acid is called basicity of that acid . Mono basic acid ( one removable H + ion ) - HCI , HNO3 Dibasic acid ( two removable H + ions ) .
for the neutralisation of charge on colloidal particles is calledia_kiran the coagulating ion or flocculating ion and the process is called coagulation . Electrophoresis : The movement of colloidal particles towards a particles electrodes under the influence of an electric field is called electrophoresis . The positively charged colloidal particles move towards cathode and negatively charged colloidal particles move towards anode .
— H₂SO̟ H₂CO̟ HPO¸ Tribasic acid ( three removable H + ions ) - H3PO4 Acidic strength
1. HF < HCl < HBr < HI
3 '

2. CH₂COOH < H₂SO < HNO₂ < HⱭ
Uses of HCI

1. HCI present in gastric juices are responsible for the digestion .
2. Used as bathroom cleaner .

8. Acids , Bases & Salts
As a pickling agent before galvanization .
3 .
Acid
An acid is a substance which
In the tanning of leather .
4 .
In the dying and textile industry .
is sour in taste
5 .
1 .

2. turns blue litmus paper into red

6. In the manufacture of gelatine from bones .
* contains replaceable hydrogen gives hydrogen ion ( H ) in aqueous solution ( Arrhenius theory ) can donate a proton ( Bronsted & Lowry concept ) 6. can accept electron ( Lewis theory )
3 /
Uses of HNO3
1 .
In the manufacture of fertilizers like ammonium nitrate . In the manufacture of explosives like TNT ( Trinitro toluene ) , TNB
2 .
( Trinitro benzene ) , Picric acid ( Trinitro phenol ) etc. Nitro Glycerine ( Dynamite )
Uses of acid :

1. As food :
Found in rain water ( first shower ) :
Lemons or oranges ( Citrus fruits ) 4 . Sour milk
( a ) Citric acid
( b ) Lactic acid ( c ) Butyric acid
It forms nitrates in the soil .
5 .
Rancid butter
6 .
In the manufacture of rayon .
( d ) Tartaric acid :
Grapes

7. In the manufacture of dyes & drugs . Uses of Sulphuric acid ( H₂SO )
1. In lead storage battery .
2. In the manufacture of HCl .
Acetic acid
( e )
Vinegar
( f ) Maleic acid
Apples
Stearic acid .
Fats .
( g )
( h ) Oxalic acid
Tomato , wood sorrel .
( 1 ) Cargoin on Telegram @apna channels

1. Our body works within a narrow pH range of 7.0 to 7.8 . Plants and animals also survive in a narrow range .
2. In digestive system : Hydrochloric acid is produced in the stomach which helps in the digestion of food but if it becomes excess , the pH falls and pain and irritation occurs . To get rid of this ANTACIDS like milk of . magnesia ( Mg ( OH ) , ) is generally used to adjust the pH .
3. In saving tooth decay : Substances like chocolates and sweets are degraded by bacteria present in our mouth . When the pH falls to 5.5 tooth decay starts . Tooth enamel ( calcium phosphate ) is the hardest substance in our body . and it gets corroded . The saliva produced by salivary glands is slightly alkaline , it helps to increase the pH , to some extent , but tooth paste is used to neutralise excess acid in the mouth .
In car battery
Use of Boric acids : As an antiseptic . Uses of Phosphoric acid
1. Its calcium salt makes our bones .
It forms phosphatic fertilizers ..

3. PO³ is involved in providing energy for chemical
reactions in our body . Uses of Ascorbic acid : Source of Vitamin C Uses of Citric acid : Flavouring agent & food preservative . Uses of Acetic acid : Flavouring agent & food preservative . Uses of Tartaric acid :
1. Souring agent for pickles
2. A component of baking powder ( sodium bicarbonate + tartaric acid ) .
Bases :
Buffer Solution
A base is a substance which is bitter in taste

1. A solution whose pH is not altered to great extent by the addition of small quantities of either an acid ( Hions ) or a base ( OH- ions ) is called buffer solution . A buffer solution can be obtained by ( a ) Mixing of weak acid and its salt with a strong base ( CH2COOH + CH₂COONa ) , ( b ) Mixing of weak base and in salt with strong acid NHOH NHẠC
1 .
2 .
turns red litmus paper into blue
3. gives hydroxyl ions ( OH ) in aqueous solution . can accept proton ( Bronsted & lowry concept ) can donate electrons ( Lewis theory )
4 .
5 .
Indicator properties of bases
Change of colour
Indicator
The buffer action of blood is due to the presence of H , CO , and HCO Salt : When an acid reacts with a base , salt and water
Red litmus paper .
turns blue
from orange to yellow .
Methyl orange
from colourless to pink
Phenolphthalein .
@apna_kira
kirare formed ...
> Oxides & hydroxides of metals are bases .
Water
Salt
Acid + Base .
➤ Water soluble bases are called alkalies e.g. NaOH , KOH ,
NaCl
H.O
HC + NaOH
etc.
Uses of some important salts :
1. Sodium Chloride : As a flavouring agent in food . In Isaline water for a patient of dehydration ( 0.9 % NaCl ) , In the manufacture of HCl etc.
2. Sodium iodate : lodised salt to prevent Goitre disease .
3. Sodium Carbonate : As washing soda , manufacturing of glass etc.
4. Sodium Benzoate : As a food preservative for pickles . 5. Potassium nitrate : As a fertilizer giving both K & N to the solid , in gun powder ( C + S + KNO ) , in match sticks etc ... 6. Calcium Chloride : Dehydrating agent used for removing moisture from gases . Calcium carbonate ( lime stone ) : In the construction of building , in the cement industry . , in the extraction of metals etc.
All alkalies are bases but all bases are not alkalies because all bases are not soluble in water .
Strength of bases
Strong bases NaOH , KOH
Weak bases : NH OH , Fe ( OH )
Acidity of a base : The number of removable hydroxyl ( OH ) ions from a base is called acidity of a base .. Acidity of NaOH = 1Acidity of KOH = 1 ; Acidity of Ca ( OH ) ₂ = 2 ( The pH scale : pH of a solution is the negative logarithm of the concentration of hydrogen ions in mole per litre .
pH = -log [ H * ] If pH < 7 then solution is acidic
If pH > 7 then solution is basic
If pH = 7 then solution is neutral
Calcium sulphate Plaster of Paris ( 2 CaSO H₂O ) – For moulds & statues , in the cement industry in the form of Gypsum ( CaSO , 2H , O ) .
The pH value of some common liquids
Liquid
Liquid

6.5

9. Calcium Phosphate : As a fertilizer ( Superphosphate of

2.5 Milk S
Lemon Juice
Wine

2.8 Blood
lime ) .

7.0 .

10. Bleaching powder : ( a ) As a disinfectant ( b ) Asableaching agent ( removing colours ) . M

3.0 Pure water
Apple Juice

8.5
Vinegar

3.0 Sea water

9.0
Urine

11. Alum : ( Potassium aluminium sulphate ) ( a ) In the rification of

4.8 Toothpaste
Coffee
Join Un Telegram @apna channelsdustry ( C ) As
Saliva

6.5

6. S.T.P. & N.T.P .;
S.T.P. Standard temperature and pressure .
Baste ( Alkaline ) -
Acidic
N.T.P. Normal temperature and pressure . At S.T.P. , for 1 mole gas
Milk of magnesia ( Antacids ) .
1 Bathroom acid :
2 Vitamin C tablets ( Ascorbic acid ) Toothpaste
Soap solution or detergent soln .
3 Lemon juice
V = 22.4 litre = 22400 ml
Solution of washing soda . Slaked lime & white wash
Orange juice
= 1 atm = 76 cm of Hg = 760 mm of Hg
p =
Toniato juice Vinegar
T = 273 K
Diffusion of gases : The process of intermixing of gases irrespective of the density relationship and without the effect of external agency is called diffusion of gases . In a gas , the molecules are far separated and the empty space among the molecules are very large . Therefore the molecules of one gas can move into the empty spaces or voids of the other gas and vice - versa . This leads to diffusion . Graham's law of diffusion : Under the similar conditions of temperature and pressure , the rates of diffusion of gases are inversely proportional to the square roots of their densities . Let r , and r , be the rates of diffusion of two gases A and B , d , and d₂ be their respective densities , then according to Graham's law of diffusion .
Fizzydrinks ( Colas & Sodawater )
Acids are always stored in glass container not in metal container because they can react with metal container . PH of human blood is 7.4 which is slightly basic in
nature .
The pH value of milk is 6.5 which is slightly acidic in nature . Hydrochloric acid ( HCI ) destroy's bacteria in stomach . If pH of solution is 7 it means that solution is neutral . Milk of magnesia is an Antacid whose formula is Mg ( OH ) 2 . A sharp pain caused by sting of an ant is due to Formic acid . Gastric juice has pH value about 1.2 which indicates that it is acidic in nature . When pH of rain water is less than 5.6 , it is called acid rain . When acid rain flows into the rivers , it Lowers the pH of the river water . Sulphuric acid ( H , SO ) is also known as oil of vitriol .
Since molecular mass = 2 × vapour density . M = 2 × d If we open a bottle of perfume , its smell spreads in the entire room within a short time due to the process of diffusion . Dalton's law of partial pressure : It states that if two or more gases which do not react chemically are enclosed in a vessel , the total pressure of the gaseous mixture is equal to which exert pressure when enclosed separately , in the same vessel at constant temperature .. @apna_kthe sum of the partial pressure that each {

9. Behaviour of Gases & Energetics Boyle's law : At constant temperature , the volume of a definite mass of a gas is inversely proportional to pressure .
Let P1 , P2 and P3 be the pressure of three non - reactive gases when enclosed separately . Let total pressure be p , then p = P₁ + P₂ + P3 10. Energetics ( Thermodynamics ) Thermodynamics is the branch of chemistry which deals with the energy changes in a chemical reaction . There are many terms used in thermodynamic .
1. System : It is the specific part of universe in which energy changes are taking place ..
2. Surrounding : The rest part of universe except system is called surrounding . If a chemical reaction is carried out in glass tube , then materials in tube is the system while rest of universe is surrounding . The glass walls of tube is boundary between system and surrounding . Idealgas equation : pV = RTis called ideal gas equation . There are three types of system
Va 1 ( at constant T )
Charle's law At constant pressure , the volume of a definite mass of a gas is directly proportional to absolute temperature . ie . VT ( at constant p ) : Gay - Lussac's law : At constant volume , the pressure of given mass of a gas is directly proportional to the temperature in Kelvin .
pxT . ( at constant V )
Avogardo's gas law At constant temperature and pressure the volume of a gas is directly proportional to the number of molecules , Van ( at constant T & p )
Where

1. Open system
2. Closed system 3 , Isolated system A system is said to be open if both mass ( matter ) and energy can be exchanged with the surrounding Example - reaction Example reaction of sodium sodium carbonate and hydrochloric acid in open container . In closed System there is only exchange of energy with surrounding and no exchange in mass takes place . A System is called isolated if there is neither exchange of mass nor of energy with surrounding . Example shot tea or coffee kept in thermos flask . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
p = Pressure , n = number of mole : R = gas constant
V = volume T - temperature in Kelvin .

0.0821 lit atm K mol-
= 8.314 ] K¹ mol - 1 1.987 cal K - ¹ mol-
A gas will behave an ideal gas at very low pressure and high temparature .

1. Heat offormation : The heat change during formation of one mole of a compound from its constituting elements at a given temperature and pressure , is called heat of formation . C ( s ) + 2H2 ( g ) → CH⭑ ( g ) AH , = −74.8
k ]
☐ mole :
KJ : mole
C ( s ) + O2 ( g ) → CO2 ( g ) AH = -393.5

2. Heat of combustion : Heat change during combustion of one mole of a substance in excess of air or oxygen is -called heat of combustion . CH¸ ( g ) + O2 ( g ) → CO2 ( g ) + 2H₂O ( 1 ) AH = -890.3
Isobaric process ; A process is said to be isobaric in which the pressure remains constant throughout i.e , dp = 0 .
4. Isochoric process ; A process carried out at constant volume is called isochoric process . thus , for isochoric process dV = 0 = 0 5. Cyclic process ; When a system undergoes a series ofpna changes and finally returns to initial state , it is called cyclic process . There is no change in energy in cyclic process i.e. dE = 0 6. Reversible process : A process is said to be reversible in case it is carried out infinitesimally slowly so that all change occurring in the direct process can be exactly reversed and the system and surroundings remain in state of equilibrium at any stage in the process . 7. Irreversible process ; It is a process in which the change is brought about rapidly and system does not have chance to achieve equilibrium . Actually in an irreversible . process , the force which drives the reactants towards products is greater than the opposing force which is to carry in the reverse process .
13 .
mole
CH ( 1 ) +
O2 ( g ) -6CO₂ ( g ) + 3H₂O ( 1 )
kJ .
ΔΗ . - - 3268 . =
mole
Efficiency of food and fuels The amount of heat produced when one gram of substarice ( food or fuel ) is completely burnt or oxidised is called efficiency of food or fuel . Greater the calorific value , better is food or fuel under consideration .
Calorific value of wood = 17
Calorific value of charcoal
1 = 3331
So , charcoal is better fuel than wood . Heat of Neutralization : The change in heat when one gram equivalent of an acid and one gram equivalent of a base present in their aqueous solution to neutralise each other , is called heat of neutralisation . NaOH ( aq ) NaOH ( aq ) + HCl ( aq ) → NaCl ( aq ) + H2O ( 1 ) AH = –57.1 kJ Heat of neutralisation of strong acid and strong base is always constant ( -57.1 kJ ) . But in case of weak acid , or weak base heat of neutralisation is less than 57.1 kJ because some amount of heat is expended to ionise weak and or weak base or both . NaOH ( aq ) + CH3COOH : ( aq )
Heat of reaction
The change in heat that accompanies a chemical reaction represented by a balanced chemical equation is called heat of reaction . C ( s ) + O2 ( g ) → CO2 ( g ) AH = - 393.5 kJ CH ( g ) + 20₂ ( g ) → CO2 ( g ) + 2H₂O ( 1 ) AH = −890.3 kJ Exothermic & Endothermic reaction Exothermic reaction ⠀⠀ If heat is released during chemical reaction , it is called exothermic reaction . In exothermic reaction , the change in heat ( AH ) is negative . C ( s ) + O2 ( g ) → CO2 ( g ) AH = -393,5 klimaye A
CH , COONa ( aq ) + H₂O ( 1 ) AH = -55.2 kJ
Heat of solution : The change in heat when one mole of a substance is dissolved in such a large excess of solvent at a given temperature that the further addition of solvent does not produce any more heat energy is called heat of solution . NaCl ( s ) + aq NaCl ( aq ) , AH = +5.35
mole
H2 ( g ) + Join on Telegram @apna Charihets
mole

11. Electrolysis
Electrolytes : These are the substances which allow the electricity to pass through them in their molten states or in the form of their aqueous solution and undergon chemical decomposition . Examples acids , bases & salts .
2. Strong electrolytes : The electrolytes which are almost completely dissociated into ions in solution are called strong electrolytes . Examples - NaCI , KCl , HCl , NaOH etc. Weak electrolytes : The electrolytes which do not ionise completely in solution are called weak electrolytes . Examples - CH , COOH , H₂CO₂ , HCN , ZnCl2 , NH OH
Specific conductance ( x )
The conductance of the solution of an electrolyte enclosed in a cell with two electrodes of unit area of cross- section separated by one centimetre is called specific conductance . The unit of specific conductance is ohm¹.cm or ohm¹ m¨¹ or Sm¹ . Equivalent conductance ( ^^ E ) The conductance of all the ions produced by one gram equivalent of electrolyte in solution is known as equivalent conductance . The unit of equivalent conductance is ohm cm² ( g - equiv ) ¹ or S cm² ( g - equiv ) -¹ .
etc.
Electrolysis : The process of chemical decomposition of an electrolyte by passage of electric current through its molten state or its solution is called electrolysis . Electrodes : In order to pass the current through an electrolytes in molten state or in aqueous solution , two rods or plates are needed to connect with the terminal of a battery . These rods or plates are called electrodes . Anode The electrode which is attached to positive terminal of battery is called anode . Oxidation occurs atanode .
Corrosion
When a metal is attacked by substances around it such as moisture , acid etc. it is said to corrode and this process is called corrosion . The black coating on silver and green coating on copper are example of corrosion : Cathode The electrode which is attached to negative Corrosion slowly coats the surface of metallic objects
terminal of batteries is called Cathode . Reduction occurs at cathode . Examples Electrolysis of molten NaCl Atanode : Cl
with oxides or other salts of the metal . Iron articles are shiny when new , but they get coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time . This process is commonly known as rusting of iron . Rust is hydrated ferric oxide ( Fe2O3.xH₂O ) . Corrosion causes damage to car bodies , bridges , iron railing , ships and to all objects made of metals .
CH :
At cathode : Nat
e :
So , Cl , gas occurs at anode while Naat cathode ..
specially those of iron
Join on Telegram @apna channels

12. Carbon and its Compounds Carbon is non - metal having atomic number 6 and mass number 12. It is placed in group ( IV ) A or group 14 in periodic table . Valency of carbon is 4 .
Saturated hydrocarbons : The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are singly bonded are called saturated hydrocarbons . Saturated hydrocarbons are also called alkanes or paraffins . Alkanes are relatively unreactive under ordinary laboratory conditions . So , alkanes are also called paraffins because paraffins means . little reactive . General formula of alkane C , H2n + 2 H
Allotropy
The substances which have same chemical properties , but different physical properties are called allotropes and this property is called allotropy . Example - Allotropies of Carbon - Diamond , graphite , charcoal .
Diamond

1. It is the purest form of carbon .
Methane ( CH ) H - C - H Ethane ( C , H ) : H - C - C - H
It is the hardest natural known substance . It is transparent , and specific gravity 3.52 . It is bad conductor of electricity and heat .
2 .
H H
3 . 4 .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are either doubly or triply bonded are called unsaturated hydrocarbons . Doubly bonded carbon atoms ( C = C ) hydrocarbons are called alkenes . The general formula of alkene is C H ..
It has very high refractive index 2.415 .
5 .
It is chemically inert and on heating above 1500 ° C , transferred into graphite . 7. It form tetrahedral crystals and hybridisation of Carbon - atom is sp³ .... 8. It has high mp & density . 9. Black diamonds called carbonado contains traces of graphite . Graphite ( Plumbago or black lead )
1. It is soft , greasy , dark greyish colored crystalline solid .
2. It is good conductor of heat and electricity .
3. Its specific gravity is 2.3 The hybridization of carbon in graphite is sp² and it has
6 .
H Ethene ( CH ) : C = C Propene ( C₂H . ) H - C - C = C Propene ( C₂H . ) : H — C — C = C
HE H
H.H
Ethene ( Ethylene ) is used for natural ripening of fruits . Triply bonded carbon atoms ( C = C ) containing hydrocarbons are called alkynes . The general formula of alkynes are CH - 2 Example - Ethyne ( Acetylene ) The molecular formula of ethyne is CH , and its structural formula is H - C = C_H
4 :
☐ hexagonal layer structure
5 .
It is chemically more reactive than diamond
Its layer structure is held by weak van der Waal's force . 7. Graphite is used in making for lining and making . electrodes of electric furnances , in making refractory crucibles , in making lead pencils , as a moderator in nuclear reactor as lubricant in machinery , as a reducing agent in steel manufacturing .
Acetylene is used for artificial ripening of fruit . Aromatic hydrocarbons : These are homocyclic compounds which contain atleast one benzene ring . in which carbon atoms are linked to one another by alternate single and double bonds . In Greek , aroma stands for sweet smell . Compounds in these classification have pleasant smell . Hence , they are called aromatic compounds .
6 .
3 .
Forms of Amorphous carbon obtained by destructive distillation
Obtained from wood Obtained from cane sugar Obtained from animal bones Obtained from coal
$ 1 Wood charcoal Sugar charcoal Bone or animal charcoal Coke charcoal Hydrocarbons
::::::
Example
Anthracene
Naphthalene
Benzene
Isomerism : Two or more compounds having same · molecular formula but different physical and chemical properties are called isomers and this phenomenon is called isomerism . Petroleum : The term petroleum ( Latin petra = rock , oleum = oil ) is applied to the dark - coloured oily liquid with offensive odour found at various depths in many regions below the surface of the earth . It is also called rock oil , mineral oil or crude oil . A complete list of petroleum products , approximate composition , boiling range and their uses is given ahead . Boiling range ( ° C ) Approximate Composition
Compounds of carbon and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons . The branch of chemistry in which we study about hydrocarbon and derivatives of hydrocarbon is known as organic chemistry . First organic compound prepared in laboratory was urea ( NH , CONH₂ ) . The natural source of hydrocarbons is petroleum . Hydrocarbons are classified as :
saturated hydrocarbons
: .1 .
Fraction
Uses
Uncondensed gas
C - CFuel gases
Up to room temperature
Crude naphtha on refraction
30-150 °
( a ) Petroleum ether ¿ ( b ) Petrol or gasoline
C - C
30-70 %
Solvent
Motor fuel , dry cleaning , petrol gas Solvent , dry cleaning
70-120 %
e ) Benzene derivatives
120-150
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Residual oil on fraction by vacuum distillation gives
Above 400 ° C
Lubrication
( a ) Lubricating oil
Candles , boot polish , wax paper etc
( b ) Paraffin wax
Toilets , ointments lubrication Paints , road surfacing As fuel LPG and CNG ( Petroleum Gases ) Liquified Petroleum Gas ( LPG ) : The petroleum gas liquified under pressure is called liquified petroleum gas . I is a mixture of butane and isobutane with small amount of propane and is easily compressed under pressure as liquid and stored in iron cylinders . It is used as domestic fuel . 2CH₁ +1302 burning 8CO₂ + 10H₂O + Heat
( c ) Vaseline ( d ) Pitch
Petroleum coke ( redistilling tar ) :

13. Fuels
A substance that can supply energy either alone orby reacting with another substance is known as fuel . Heat produced by fuel is measured in Calories . An ideal fuel should

1. have high calorific value
2. be cheap and easily available
3 .
be easily stored & transport
The stench due to leakage from LPG Cylinder is because of Ethyl mercaptan ..

4. be regulated and controlled 5 have low ignition temperature The quantity of fuel is expressed in the form of calorific value . Calorific value is the total quantity of heat liberated by complete combustion of a unit mass of fuel in air or oxygen . Calorific value of fuels are expressed in kcal / m³ or British Thermal Unit ( B.T.U ) per cubic foot .. 1 kcal / m³ = 0.107 B.T.U / f³ · Fuel may be solid ( e.g wood , coal etc. ) Liquid ( e.g kerosene oil , petroleum , alcohol etc. ) orgas ( e.g water gas , producer gas , coal gas , oil gas , natural gas , gobar gas , LPG etc. ) However , gaseous fuel are considered to be the best fuels .
1. Water gas ( syn gas ) : It is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen . It is obtained by the action of steam on a red hot coke at 1000 °
C. Compressed Natural Gas ( CNG ) : The natural gas compressed at very high pressure is called compressed natural gas ( CNG ) . It consists mainly of methane ( 95 % ) which is a relatively unreactive hydrocarbons and make Lit nearly complete combustion possible . The other 5 % is made of various gases such that ethane , propane and butane including small amount of other gases N2 , CO2 , H₂S , water vapour etc. The CNG is now being used as a better fuel than gasoline for running buses , cars and three - wheelers in metropolitan cities like Delhi , Mumbai etc , because of its complete combustion and no unburnt carbon is being released in the atmosphere to cause air pollution . Knocking and Octane Number : The metallic sound produced due to irregular burning of the fuel is known as knocking . The knocking lowers the efficiency of the engine and results the loss of energy . A fuel which has minimum knocking property is always preferred . It has been observed that the straight chain aliphatic hydrocarbons have ! higher tendency to knock while branched or unsaturated hydrocarbons have less tendency to knock . To indicate the quality of gasoline ( petrol ) , a method of gradation has been introduced which is termed octane rating or octane number . Two compounds heptane and is octane have been taken as standard . Heptane which cause maximum knocking is assigned to octane number zero and iso - octane which causes minimum knocking is assigned
C + H2O CO + H₂ - 28 kcal
Water gas
Producer gas : It is a mixture of CO and N2 . It is prepared by burning coke in limited supply of air . It is the cheapest gaseous fuel , however its calorific value is not very high because it has a large proportion of nitrogen . Coal gas : It is a mixture of H , CH , CO and other gases like N. , C₂HO , etc. It is obtained by destructive distillation of coal at about 1000 ° C . Oil gas : It is a mixture of H. , CH , CH , CO and other gases like CO ,. It is obtained by thermal cracking of kerosene oil . It is used in laboratories .
the octane number 100 .
CH , сн
Gobar gas : It contains CH , CO and H. It is produced CH , CH , CH , CH , CH , CH₂CH , CHC - CH - CH - C
by fermentation of gobar in absence of air . It is used as a domestic fuel in villages . Natural gas : It is a mixture of gaseous hydrocarbons viz methane 85 % ethane , propanetan etc. Liquefied
Heptane
CH₁ Iso - Octane
Octane number = 0 jo notringono i jaja vo
( 2,2,4 - Trimethylpenta
petroleum may adanalelegram @apna_chanel Sumber
= 100 °

1. Peat : Low grade coal produces 50-60 % less heat & more smoke & ash .
% ,
Pb + CO

2. Lignite : High moisture content 60-70 % __ burns easily , low calorific value .
3500-4500 .
F₁₂O3 + 3C 2Fe + 3CO ; PbO + C
A series is obtained by arranging the metals in decreasing order of reactivity which is known as Activity series .

3. Bituminous : Black , hard , smoky , 75-80 % 7500-8000 flame , domestic fuel .
Anthracite Superior quality , 90-95 % hardest form , high calorific value .
6700-7500
Important metals and their ores .

14. Metallurgy .
One
Chemical Formula
The process of extracting metal in pure form from its ore is known as metallurgy . Minerals : The compound of a metal found in nature is called a mineral . A mineral may be a single compound or a complex mixture . Ores : Those minerals from which metal can be economically and easily extracted are called ores . All ores are mineral but all minerals are not ores .. Gangue ( or matrix ) : The ore is generally associated with earthy impurities like sand , rocks and limestone known as gangue or matrix . Flux : A substance added to ore to remove impurities is called flux . There are two types of flux-
NaNO
Chile saltpeter
Sodium ( Na )
Na.CO , 2NaHCO 3HO
Trena
Na BO , 10HO
Borax .
Common salt
NaCl
CaCO , MgCO ,
Dolomite . Calcite
Calcium ( Ca ) .
CaCO3
CaSO 2 HO
Gypsum
Fluorspar
Car ,
Asbestus
Casio MgSiO
ALO , 2H , O
Aluminium ( Al ) - Bauxite
ALO Kausho Na , AlF6
Corundum
Felspar

1. acidic flux2 , basic flux . Acidic flux is added to remove basic impurity SiO2 + FeO _ FeSiO3 acidic flux basic impurity .
Cryolite :
Alunite
KSO , AL ( SO ) , 4 Al ( OH ) , 3 ALO , 6 SIO , 2H , O
Kaolin
KNO ,
Potassium ( K ) Nitre ( salt peter ) ✓ Carnalite Magnesium ( Mg ) Magnesite
Ferrous silicate
KC1 MSCL , 6HO
Basic flux is added to remove acidic impurity .
MgCO
CaCO3 + SiO₂
CaSiO , CO₂
MgCO , CaCO
Dolomite
Calcium silicate :
basic flux
acidic impurity
MgSO.7 H₂O
Epsom salt
Slag : Combination of gangue with flux in ores forms fusible material which is called slag .
MgSO , HO
KCI MgCl 6 HO
Gangue + flux
slag
.S.CO
Strontium ( Sr ) .
SiO , + CaO → CaSiO
Silestine
SrSO
Concentration : The process of removal of gangue from the ore is known as concentration of ore . Concentration of Copper ( Cu ) ,, } ** Cuprite
СЦО
Cus
ore can be carried out in the following ways depending upon
Copper glance
CuFeS
the nature of the of oin on Telegram @apna_channels

4. Ferrichydroxide [ ( Fe ( OH ) 3 ) ] : In laboratory reagent and 1 in making medicines . 5. Iodine ( 1 ) ( a ) As antiseptic , ( b ) In making tincture of
Bismuthite
BLS ,
Bismuth ( Bi )
FeO
Iron ( Fe )
Haemetite
iodine .
2FeO 3HO
Lemonite

6. Bromine ( Br ) : ( a ) In dye industry ( b ) As laboratory reagent . 7. Chlorine ( Ch ) : In the formation of ( a ) Mustard gas ( c ) Bleaching powder . 8. Hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) : In the formation of aquaregia ( 3 HC1 : 1 HNO3 ) and dyes . 9. Sulphuric acid ( H₂SO₁ ) : ( a ) As a reagent ( b ) In purification of petroleum ( c ) In lead storage battery . 10. Sulphur dioxide ( SO2 ) : ( a ) As oxidants & reductants ( b ) As bleaching agent . @apna_KanHydrogen Sulphides ( HS ) : In qualitative analysis of
Magnetite
Fe₁₂O ,
FeCO₂
Siderite
Iron Pyrite
Copper Pyrites CuFeS
Smelite
Cobalt ( Co )
Milarite
Nickel ( Ni )
MnO ,
Magnese ( Mn ) Pyrolusite
Magnite Nis
MnO 2H₂O K ( UO ) , VO 3HLO
Camotite
Uranium ( U )
Pitch blende
U.O
Alloys : An alloy is a metallic intimately mixed solid mixture of two or more different elements , at least one of which is metal . Alloys are homogeneous in molten state but they may be homogeneous or heterogeneous in solid state . Important alloys & their uses
basic radical ( group separation ) . 12. Sulphur ( S ) : Antiseptics , vulcanization of rubber , gun powder , medicine . 13. Ammonia ( NH3 ) : As reagent in ice factory . 14. Phosphorous : ( a ) Red ( P ) refrigerent , in match industry
Uses
Compositions
Alloys Brass . Bronze
etc.
Cu ( 70 % ) Zn ( 30 % ) In making of utensils Cu ( 90 % ) + Sn ( 10 % ) In making of coins , bell and utensils GermanCut & Ni In making of utensils
( b ) White ( P ) - Rat killing Medicine . 15. Producer gas ( CO + N2 ) : ( a ) In heating furnace ( b ) Cheap fuel ( c ) In Extraction of metal . 16. Water gas ( CO + H2 ) : ( a ) As fuel ( b ) Welding work . 17. Coal gas : ( a ) As fuel ( b ) Inert atmosphere . 18. Nitrous oxide ( NO ) : Laughing gas , Surgery . 19. Carbondioxide ( CO2 ) : Sodawater , Fire extinguisher . 20. Carbon monoxide ( CO ) : In phosgene gas ( COC ) . 21. Graphite : As electrodes . 22. Diamond Ornaments , Glass cutting , Rock drilling .. 23. Alum [ K₂SO Al¿ ( SO4 ) 3 · 24 H₂O ] : ( a ) Purification o water ( b ) Leather industry .
Silver
( 60 % + 20 % + 20 % )
Rolled gold Cu ( 90 % ) + Al ( 10 % ) In making of cheap omaments Gunmetal Cu Sn + Zn + Pb In making of gun , barrels , gears ( 88 % -10 % 1 % 1 % ) & bearings
Delta metal Cu Zn + Fe ( 60 % 38 % 2 % )
Inmakingofbladesofaeroplane
Munz metal Cu ( 60 % ) + Zn ( 40 % ) In making of coins Dutch metal Cu ( 80 % ) + Zn ( 20 % ) In making of artificial omaments Monel metal Cu ( 70 % ) + Ni ( 30 % ) For base containing container Rose metal Bi Pb + Sn For making of automatic fuse ( 50 % 23 % ( 22 % ) Solder Pb ( 5 % ) + Sn ( 50 % ) For soldering Magnallum Al ( 95 % ) + Mg ( 5 % ) For frame of Aeroplane Duralumin . Al + Cu + Mg + Mn . For making of utensils ( 94 % 3 % 2 % 1 % ) Type metal Sn + Pb + Sb In printing industry ( 5 % 80 % 15 % ) Bell metal Cu ( 80 % ) + S ( 20 % ) For casting bells , statues

24. Aluminium sulphate [ Al ( SO ) , 18H₂O ] In paper industry / fire extinguisher . 25. Anhydrous aluminium chloride ( AIC₁₁ ) Cracking of petroleum . 26. Mercuric Chloride ( HgCl₂ ) : Calomel , Insecticides ( Corrosive sublimate ) .
27 Mercuric oxide ( HgO )
Stainless steel non te egram @aonHg ) Gintmention , amalgum .
poison .
13 % , 15 % , 10 % , 05 % ) surgical cullery

30. Zinc Sulphate ( Whitevitriol ) ( ZnSO , 7H , O ) : Lithopone , Eye ointment . 31. Zinc Chloride ( ZnCl2 ) : Textile industry . 32. Zinc oxide ( ZnO ) ; Ointment .. 33. Zinc ( Zn ) : In battery .

34. Calcium carbide ( CaC ) : Calcium cyanide & acetylene
gas .

35. Bleaching powder [ Ca ( OCI ) CI ] : Insecticides , Bleaching actions . 36. Common salt : The chemical name of common salt is sodium chloride . 37. Calcium sulphate ( CaSO 2H2O ) : Cement industry . 38. Calcium carbonate ( CaCO3 ) : Lime & toothpaste . 39. Copper sulphate ( CuSO4.5H2O ) : Insecticides , Electric cells . 40. Cupric oxide ( CuO ) : Blue & green glass , purification of petroleum 41. Cuprous Oxide ( Cu₂O ) : Red glass , pesticides . 42. Copper ( Cu ) : Electrical wire .. 43. Sodium nitrate ( NaNO3 ) : Fertilizer . 44. Sodium Sulphate ( Glauber salt ) ( N₁₂SO 10H₂O ) : Medicine , cheap glass . . 45. Sodium bicarbonate ( Baking soda ) ( NaHCO3 ) : Fire extinguisher , bakery , reagent . 46. Sodium Carbonate ( Washing soda ) : ( a ) Glass industry
Nichrome wire is used in electrical heater [ ( Ni , Cr , Fe ) ] Potassium carbonate ( K.CO₁ ) is known as pearl ash .
Generally transition metals and their compounds are coloured .
> Zeolite is used to remove hardness of water . In cytochrome iron ( Fe ) is present .
Selenium metal is used in photo electric cell . Galium metal is liquid at room temperature .
AAAA
Palladium metal is used in aeroplane .
Radium is extracted from pitchblende ... World famous Eiffel Tower has steel and cement base . Actinides are radio - active elements . " Cadmium rod is used in nuclear reactor to slow down the speed of neutron . Sodium peroxide is used in submarine and also to _ purify closed air in hospital . > Co ( 60 ) is used in cancer treatment .
A A A
( b ) Paper industry ( c ) Removal of permanent hardness na xiran of water ( d ) washing ( e ) The chemical formula is .Na2CO3-10H₂O Hydrogen peroxide ( H2O ) : Oxidants & reductants ,
Onion and garlic have odour due to potassium . Oxides of metals are alkaline . Silver and copper are the best conductor of electricity . Gold and Silver are the most malleable metal . Mercury and iron produces more resistance in comparison to the other during the flow of electricity . Lithium is the lightest and the most reductant element . In fireworks , crimson red colour is due to presence of strontium ( Sr ) . Green colour is due to the presence of Barium in fireworks . Barium sulphate is used in X - ray of abdomen as barium meal . Barium hydroxide is known as Baryta water . Osmium is the heaviest metal and the Platinum is the hardest . Zinc oxide is known as flower of zinc . It is also known as chinese white and used as white paint . Silver chloride is used in photochromatic glass . Silver iodide is used in artificial rain . Silver nitrate is used as marker during election . It is kept in coloured bottle to avoid decomposition . Silver spoon is not used in egg food because it forms black silver sulphide , To harden the gold , copper is mixed . Pure gold is 24
AAA
Insecticides .

48. Heavy water ( D2O ) : Nuclear reactor . 49. Liquid hydrogen : Rocket fuel . 50. Plaster of paris [ ( CaSO4 ) 2 2H , O / CaSO½ H₂O ) ]
Statue , Surgery .
Plaster of paris is obtained by heating gypsum at 120 ° C . 2 [ CaSO 2H₂O ]
2CaSO H₂O + 3H₂O
Gypsum
Plaster of Paris

51. Quick lime : Calciumoxide ( CaO ) . 52 Slaked lime - Ca ( OH ) 2 .

15. Important Facts About Some Metals Zinc phosphide is used for killing rats . * Wood furnitures are coated with zinc chloride to prevent termites . Excess of copper in human beings causes disease called Wilson . Galvanised iron is coated with zinc . Rusting of iron is a chemical change which increases the weight of iron . Calcium hydride is called hydrolith . Calcium hydride is used to prepare fire proof and waterproof clothes , · In flash - bulb , magnesium wire is kept in atmosphere of nitrogen gas ,
carrat .
Iron Pyrites ( FeS ) is known as fool's gold . Mercury is kept in iron pot because it doesn't form amalgam with iron . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

16. Non metal
In modern periodic table there are 24 non metals , 11 are gases , 1 ' is liquid ( Br . ) and 82 are solid . ☐ Electronegative elements are non metals . Non metals are bad conductor of heat and electricity except graphite , Si & Ge are semi conductor . Hydrogen ( H2 ) Hydrogen is the lightest gas having three isotopes ¡ ¡ H¹ ,
AAA
¨¡H³ . "
Tritium ( Radioactive )
Protium
able having
Protium is only one isotope in Periodic
Thulium has symbol Tm .
zero neutron .
Deuterium oxide is known as heavy water and used in nuclear reactor as moderator . Liquid hydrogen is used as rocket fuel . Hydrogen is known as range element because it may kept in group I & group VII
A. Water ( H₂O )
Group I elements are called alkali metals and its hydroxides are alkaline while group II elements are called Alkaline earth metal . Flash bulb contain magnesium wire in medium of nitrogen . Aluminium hydroxide is used to make water proof and Stainless Clothes Calcium Carbide ( CaC ) reacts with water to produce acetylene gas . The reaction of Ferric Oxide ( Fe2O3 ) with aluminium is used to fill up the cracks of railway tracks and machine parts . This reaction is called Thermite reaction . Anaemia is caused due to deficiency of Iron in the body while excess of Iron in the body may cause siderosis . Bantu tribes of Africa suffer from siderosis because they drink beer in iron utensils . ***
Water is a polar molecule .
Hard water Less froth with soap . Soft water more froth with soap . Hard water - Due to the presence of soluble impurities of bicarbonates , chlorides & sulphates of Ca & Mg .
Temporary hardness Due to the presence bicarbonate of calcium and magnesium . Permanent hardness - Due to the presence of chlorides and sulphates of calcium and magnesium . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

17. Common Facts .
Artificial perfumes are prepared from Ethyl acetate .
Urea was the first organic compound synthesised in Laboratory .
Krypton ( Kr ) is used in airport landing lights and in
light houses .
Vinegar contains 10 % acetic acid . Acetylene is used for light production . The hydrogen atoms present in acetylene molecule ar acidic in nature . Ferric chloride is used to stop bleeding . Barium is responsible for green colour in fireworks . Cesium is used in solar cells . Yellow phosphorus is kept in water . Sea weeds contains iodine . During cooking maximum vitamin is lost .
Procesa
5 Catalyst
Fe + Mo Synthesis of NH , by Haber's process . Synthesis of vanaspati Ghee ( hydrogenation ) P Synthesis of HSO , by Contact process . NO ⠀⠀ In the manufacture of H₂SO , by the Lead chamber process . Hot ALO In the preparation of Ether from Alcohol . CuCl Preparation of chlorine gas by Deacon process . Some Important Explosive Dynamite It was discovered Alfred Nobel in 1863 .
It is predi @ bben delegram @apnapchannelsor , glucose is used

1. Calcium superphosphate
2. Nitrophosphate
3. Triple phosphate
4. Phosphatic slag Nitrogenous Fertilizers : Plants need nitrogen for rapid Bisphenol A is a chemical used for progress in food growth and increase in their protein content . For this reason ,
foodap ,
apna
packaging material . Xenon is also called stranger gas .
nitrogenous fertilizers become more important . The chief nitrogeneous fertilizers are ammonium sulphate , calcium cyanamide , ammonium nitrate , urea , calcium , ammonium nitrate . Urea contains 46.6 % nitrogen . · Potash Fertilizers : Potassium gives the structural length to plants . Potassium nitrate , potassium choride and potassium sulphates etc are important potash fertilizers . NPK Fertilizers Fertilizers containing N , P and K in suitable adjusted proportions are known as NPK fertilizers . These are obtained by mixing nitrogeneous , phosphatic and potash fertilizers in suitable proportions . Expression like 4-8-2 used for a mixed fertilizer indicates that it contains 4 % N , 8 % P₂O , and 2 % KO
2. Dyes : Coloured substances used for colouring textiles , foodstuffs , silk , wool , etc. are called dyes . Different classes of dyes are given below . ( a ) Nitro dyes : These are polynitro derivatives of phenol where nitro group acts as a chromophore and hydroxyl group as auxochrome ..
If soluble substance is added to a liquid , the surface tension of that liquid is increased . Conversion of force nitrogen in atmosphere into nitrates is known as Nitrogen fixation . Picric acid is an organic compound which is used as a reagent in Laboratory . Bones are composed of 8 % phosphorous . Safety matches are made by using red phosphorous . Ammonium chloride is used to electroplate utensils . Benzene or Ether is dissolved in pure alcohol to form power alcohol , which is used as a fuel for aeroplanes . Milk is an emulsion : Platinum is also called ' White Gold ' . The heaviest element known up till January 2015 has atoms number 118 ( ununoctium ) . Muddy water is treated with alum in purification process , it is termed as coagulation . Peroxyacetyl nitrate ( or peroxyacyl nitrate ) is a secondary pollutant present in photochemical smog . If it is thermally unstable and decomposes into peroxy ethanyl redicals and nitrogen dioxide . It is a Lachrymatory substance .
AAAA AAA A
( b ) Azo dyes : These are an important class of dyes and . are characterised by the presence of azo group ( -N = N- ) as the chromophore . The groups like NH , NR or -OH , etc. , present in the molecule containing one or more azo groups act as the auxochromes .
( c ) Triphenylmethane dyes : These dyes contain the paraquinoid moiety as a chromophore and OH ,
Industries located in and around Agra produce pollutants like sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide . These gases react with water vapour present in atmosphere to form sulphuric acid and nitric acid . This acids drop with Telegram @apna charinels within _ NH or NR as auxochrome . These dyes are not fast to light and washing and hence are mainly used for colouring paper or typewriter ribbons , e.g. malachite green which is used for dyeing wool and silk directly

2. Thermosetting plastics . Thermoplastic : These are the polymers which can be easily softened repeatedly when heated and hardened when cooled with little change in their properties . Examples Polyethylene , polystyrene , polyvin chloride , teflon . etc.
2. Thermosetting plastics : These are the polymers whic undergo permanent change on heating . On heating the undergo extensive cross linking in moulds and becom hard and infusible therefore , they can not be reused . Examples Bakelite , glyptal , terrylene etc. Bakelite ( Phenol - formaldehyde resins ) : It is condensation polymer and is obtained from phenol an formaldehyde in presence of either an acid or a base cataly It is used for making combs , fountain pens , photograp
1 :
Types :
1. Crown glass : Contains KO & BaO as the basic records , electrical goods etc.
Rubber : It is a polymer which is capable of retumi - Jein on Telegram @apnaohannester being stretched f
oxide

5. Soaps form Lather easily in soft water but in a hard water , a lot of soap gets wasted . Hard water contain bicarbonates , sulphates and chlorides of calcium or magnesium . When soap is added to hard water , the soluble sodium salts of higher fatty acids present in the soap are converted to their calcium or magnesium salts . These are no longer soluble in water and form precipitates . Thus , a lot of soap get wasted without forming any lather . Even hair washed with soap dissolved in hard water look dull and sticky because soap particles stick to these . 6. The soap micelles are large enough to scatter light . Hence a soap solution appears cloudy . Synthetic detergents are also called soap - less . soaps because theyactlikesoapinhavingsimilar cleaning properties but do not contain the usual soaps . These are better cleaning agents than soaps because they can also be used in case of hard water . Actually , detergents are the sodium sulphonates or sulphates of the long chain hydrocarbons . When added to hard water , they change into the corresponding calcium and magnesium salts . Since these dissolve in water , detergents are not wasted unlike soaps . There fore , they readily form lather and can be used in hard water as well . ( i ) Synthetic detergents can be used in acidic medium while soaps fail to do so because of their hydrolysis to free acids . ( ii ) Synthetic detergents are more soluble in water and hence form better lather than soaps . ( iii ) Although detergents are better than soaps in
Neoprene is a polymer of chloroprene ( 2 - chloro - 1,3- -- butadiene ) and is also called polychloroprene . Thiokol is prepared by copolymerisation of ethylene dichloride with sodium tetrasulphide ( Na2S ) . It is slso called polysulphide rubber . Some common man - made polymers and their uses . Polymer
Use
Polythene .
Packaging material , carry bags , bottles . ✓ Bottles , Crates .
Polypropene
Pipes insulation . Fibres , ropes Nonstick kitchen ware Rubber erasers Foam Thermocole Rubber bubble gum Electrical insulation buttons Bullet proof glass Crockery
Polyvinyl chloride ( PVC )
Nylon ( Polyester ) .
Teflon
Vinyl rubber
Polystyrene
Poly ( Styrene butadiene )
Bakelite : Lexan Melam
Paints Paints can be applied on a surface to protect it from corrosion and weathering or to give it an attractive look . A paint contains a pigment , a vehicle and a thinner , Zinc oxide , white lead and titanium oxide are the commonly used white pigments . The pigments is mixed with oil like linseed or soya bean oil or a polymer . A thinner is a solvent such as turpentine oil or kerosene It makes the paint more fluid so
that it may be applie☺in on Telegram @apha channels as well . These

4. Oxides of carbon are carbon monoxide ( CO ) and carbon dioxide ( CO ) . Carbon monoxide of a colourless and odourless gas . It is highly poisonous to living beings because of its ability to block the delivery of oxygen to the organs and tissues . It is produced as a result of incomplete combustion of carbon . Carbon monoxide binds to haemoglobin to form carboxyhaemoglobin , which is about 300 times more stable . than oxygen haemoglobin complex . In blood when the concentration of carboxyhaemoglobin reaches about 3-4 . percent , the oxygen carrying capacity of blood is greatly reduced . This oxygen deficiency results into headache , weak eyesight , nervousness and cardiovascular disorder . The habit of smoking in pregnant women increases the carbon monoxide level in blood and may induce premature birth , spontaneous abortion and deformed babies .
The atmosphere that surrounds the earth is not of the same thickness at all heights . The lowest region of Carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) is released into the atmosphere atmosphere in which the human beings along with other by respiration , burning of fossil fuel for energy and by the organisms live is called troposphere . It extends up to the decomposition of limestone during the manufacture of height of about 10 kilometre from sea level . Above the cement . Normally carbondioxide is found 0.03 percent by troposphere , between the 10 and 50 km above the sea .. volume of the atmosphere . Excess of carbondioxide in the air . Level lies stratosphere . Troposphere is a turbulent , dusty is removed by green plants and this maintains an appropriate zone containing air , much water vapour and clouds . The level of CO , in the atmosphere . The increased amount of stratosphere on the other hand , contains dinitrogen ( N ) aprcarbondioxide ( CO2 ) in the air is mainly responsible for dioxygen ( O2 ) , Ozone ( 03 ) and little water vapour . Tropospheric pollution .
global warming .
Global warming and Greenhouse Effect About 75 percent of the solar energy reaching the earth is absorbed by the earth's surface , which increases its temperature . The rest of the heat radiates back to the atmosphere . Some of the heat is trapped by gases such as carbon dioxide , methane , Ozone , chlorofluorocarbon compounds ( CFCs ) and water vapour in the atmosphere .. Thus , they add to the heating of the atmosphere . This causes global warming . In cold places flowers , vegetables and fruits are grown in glass covered areas called greenhouse . In greenhouse , solar radiations pass through the transparent glass and heat up the soil and the plants . The warm soil and plant emit infrared radiations . Since glass is opaque to infrared radiations ( thermal region ) , it partly reflects and partly absorbs these radiations . This mechanism keeps the energy of sun trapped in the greenhouse .. We humans also live in greenhouse . We are surrounded by a blanket of air called the atmosphere which has kept the temperature in earth constant for centuaries , but it is now undergoing change slowly . Just as the glass in a greenhouse holds the Sun's warmth inside , atmosphere traps the Sun's heat near the earth's surface and keeps it warm . This is called natural greenhouse effect and makes the earth perfect for . life . Carbondioxide ( CO ) molecules also trap heat as they are transparent to sunlight but not to the heat radiation . If the amount of carbon dioxide crosses the delicate proportion of 0.03 percent , the natural greenhouse balance may get disturbed : Carbondioxide is the major contributor to
The following are the major gaseous and particulate pollutants in the troposphere .
1. Geseous air pollutants contain oxides of sulphur , nitrogen and carbon , hydrogen sulphides , ozone and other oxidants .
2. Particulate pollutants contain dust , mist , fumes , smoke and smog.etc .
Gaseous air Pollutants

1. Oxides of sulphur are produced when sulphur containing fossil fuel is burnt . The most common oxide of sulphur is sulphur dioxide ( SO2 ) . Sulphur dioxide is a poisonous gas to both animal and plants . Even a low concentration of sulphur dioxide causes respiratory diseases . e.g. asthma , bronchitis , emphysema in human beings . Sulphur dioxide causes irritation to the eyes , resulting in tears and redness . High concentration of sulphur dioxide ( SO2 ) leads to stiffness of flower buds which eventually fall off from plants .

2. Dinitrogen ( N2 ) and dioxygen ( O2 ) are the main constituents of air . Theses gases do not react with each other at normal temperature . At high altitudes when lightning strikes , they combine to form oxides of nitrogen . Nitrogen dioxide ( NO ) isoxidised tonitrateion ( NO ) whichiswashed into soil where it serves as fertilizer . In an automobile engine at high temperature ( 1483K ) when fossil fuel is burnt then nitric oxide ( NO ) and nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) are formed . The irritant red haze in the traffic and congested places is due to oxides of nitrogen . Higher concentrations of nitrogen the leaves of
dioxide ( NO2 ) dan Telegram @ aphaséhannelsher greenhouse

4. Nitrate : The maximum limit of nitrate in drinking water is 50 ppm . Excess nitrate in drinking water can cause disease such as methemoglobinemia ( ' blue baby ' syndrome ) 5. Other metals : The maximum concentration of some common metals recommended in drinking water are given below .
Maximum concentration ( ppm or mg dm
Metal
Green Chemistry
Iron ( Fe )

0.2 0.05 .
Green chemistry is a way of thinking and is about @apna_lising the existing knowledge and principles of chemistry
Mangnese ( Mn )
Aluminium ( Al ) .

0.2
to bring about minimum pollution or deterioration to the environment . A few examples of chemicals used and the techniques employed in green chemistry are given below- 1.Dry Cleaming of Clothes : Tetra chloroethane ( CLC = CCL ) was earlier used as solvent for dry cleaning . The compound contaminates the ground water and is also a suspected carcinogen . The process using this compound is now being replaced by a process ; where liquefied carbondioxide , with a suitable detergent is used . Replacement of halogenated solvent by liquid CO , will result less harmful to ground water . These days , hydrogen peroxide ( HO ) is used for the purpose of bleaching clothes in the process of Laundary , which gives better . results and makes the user of lesser amount of water .
2. Bleaching of paper : Chlorine gas was used earlier for bleaching paper . These days , hydrogen peroxide ( H₂O₂ ) with suitable catalyst , which promotes the bleaching action of hydrogen peroxide , is used .
3. Synthesis of Chemicals : Ethanal ( CH , CHO ) is now commercially prepared in one step oxidation of ethene in presence of ionic catalyst in aqueous medium with a yield of 90 % , Catalyst CH = CH , +0 , CHỊ CHO Pd ( II ) / Cu ( II ) in water Ethene in ve Green chemistry in a nutshell is a cost effective approach which involves reduction in material , energy consumption and waste generation .
Copper ( Cu )

3.0
Zinc ( Zn )

5.0
Cadmium ( Cd ) Soil Pollution

0.005
India being an agriculture based economy . The surplus production is stored by governmental and non - govern- mental organisations for the lean season . Some insectides and pesticides for protection of our crops are needed . However these insecticides pesticides and herbicides cause soil pollution .
Pesticides
Pesticides are the chemicals that are used to kill or stop the growth of unwanted Organism . Prior to world war II naturally occuring chemicals such as nicotine were used as pesticides . During world war II DDT ( Dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane ) was found to be of great use in the control of malaria and other insect - borne diseases . Therefore , after the war , DDT was put to use in agriculture to control the damages caused by insects , rodents , weeds and various crop diseases . However due to adverse effect , its use has been banned in India . Now , Aldrin and Dieldrin were introduced in the market by pesticide industry .. Herbicides
Ethanal
These are the compounds used to control weeds . Sodium chlorate ( NaClO3 ) sodium arsenite ( Na , AsO₁ ) are commony used herbicides but arsenic compounds , being toxic to mammals , are no longer preferred . Instead organic
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Introduction
Biology : Branch of science in which scientific study of life is done . Bios Life & Logos = Study . Therefore study of life is called Biology . The term biology was first coined by Lamarck and Treviranus in the year 1801. Biology has two main branch
1. Botany : Study of different aspects of plants . Theophrastus is known as father of Botany .
2. Zoology Study of various aspects of animals . Aristotle is called father of Zoology as well as Biology . Important Terms of Biology :
their environment .
➤ Evolution : Study of origin of life , variation and formation of new species . . > Embryology : Study of fertilization of egg , formation of zygote and development of embryo . > Eugenics : Study of factors connected with the improvement of human race . Euthenics Study of environmental condition that contribute to the improvement of human beings . Euphenics : The improvement of phenotypic defect due to genetical abnormality , by altering the environment . > Ethnology : Study of science dealing with different races
Anatomy : Study of internal structure of organism . Agrology : Soilscience dealingspecially with production of crop . Agronomy : Science and technology of soil management for the production of crop . Agrostology : Study of grasses . Arthrology : Study of joints . Apiculture : Rearing of honey bee for honey . Anthropology Study of origin , development and
of human .
> Ethology : Study of animal behaviour in their natured habitats . > Etiology : Study of causative agent of disease . > Entomology : Study of insects .
_ relationship between the culture of past and present ap_kiran
Study of possibility of life in space . > Floriculture : Cultivation of plant for flower . Food technology : Scientific processing , preservation , storage and transportation of food . Forensic science : Application of science for analysis of various fact and evidence to identify the cause or the person involve in criminal act . Fishery : Catching , breeding , rearing and marketing of
human .
Anthology : Study of flower and flowering plant . Angiology : Study of blood vascular system including arteries , veins and lymphatic vessels . Andrology : Branch of physiology and medicine specially deal with the problem related to male reproductive organ . Bryology : Study of Bryophytes . Biometrics : Statistical analysis of Biological data . Biomedical engineering : Application of engineering for the production and designing of spare part for overcoming various defects in man . e.g. Artificial limbs , Iron lung , Pacemaker etc. Biotechnology Technology concerned with living beings for wilful manipulation on molecular level . Bacteriology : Study of bacteria . Cytology : Study of cell . Cryobiology : It is the study of the effect of the low temperature on organisms and their preservation . Clone : Clones are genetically identical individual in a population . Cardiology : Study of heart and blood vesseles . Chiropody : Branch of science related with the study of feet . Demography : Study of population .. Diffusion : Random movement of molecule / ion or gases from a region of higher concentration to lower .
A A
fishes .
Forestry : Development and management of forest . ➤ Fermentation : Process of incomplete oxidation that occur in microbes and other cells in absence of oxygen leading to the formation of ethyl alcohol .
☑Genetics Study of variation and transmission of heredity character from parents to their young ones . " Growth Permanent increase in weight , volume and size of an organism . Genetic Engineering : Manipulation of gene in order to improve the organism . Gynecology : Study of female reproductive organ . Gerontology : Study of ageing .
Gastroenterology
Study of alimentary canal or ( stomach and intestine ) related disorders . Hypertonic : When two solution have different solut concentration . The solution which have higher solute concentration is called hypertonic . Hypotonic : In two solutions which have lower solut concentrat Join on Telegram @ apnaékannels

1. Cliation of Ongeaison The illors of arganisms . It is impresible to sexandria sprater Clasification meas tones egenam undifferent groupe Sudy of andaag effe
beterotrophs .
Protziz ze gorped as amoeboid protizzam ( A ) Regulated protizons ( Trypan
aude all vezanim mnovo magiame Pamat Aumales brk gume Necure " Refundatamfordendesstaavana unfire desta 19 by
mans
zz Peznsectum ) ,
( Pianodium )
heboheterotrophic and autotrophi
Cimiter
Tanie trwale
disputed pration of organises the sacre , ring , fugated sect
- Englene is a connecting link between plants
citrator

2. Fong kingdom includes nongreen plants having ketztrophic métion Most gaze saprophytes obtaining their sto tradedanddecozying organic matter Ex Mushroom
ی کار شده است ترکیه آن
Criz
Taleteria .
Frue Kington Costication was groposed in 1969 by Tea of desfig organi furgone a aplenty of call streame , perdidagaanded recrition , be side and phone relationship ,
→ Yeasts celler fungi used in making bread amë bea . They reproduce asemaly by budding Se fog are parasitic causing disease in plants and
angles , Max , ripus eic are the ele Song . Neospora is a fungi , extensively used in biochemical Gyak Except was fun are filamentous consist of Slender thread like structure called hyphae . " pus is also known as bread mould . Some for live as symbionis in association with trims Whereand with the root of higher plantcalle junkie . Some for are vurce of antibiotic like Penicily Par The kingdon includes all plant except sig Cs , fong ) and member of manera and preser tall animal comes under this k
i sa te kon res
way
except protuan .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Cellin plant call there is a rigid cell wall which is non bring and fly permeable it s of cellulose or dit provide shape and Recal Cell wall of bacteria is made up of
Con
Mished Brassica campestris Housefly .

4. Study of Cell Cytology Simit of call is called cytology . Cal is the basic structural and functional un
It is also know
plan
which from the outer covering of animal cell in
it is found wall wall is thin , elastic Eving @apna_kiracle layer , permeable ma
cell
* The word ' call ' was first coined by British scientist Robert Hook in the year 1665 . Anton Van Leeuwenhook first described a living cell in 157 .
Call membrane is mainly composed of lipids
and cholesterol . The major ds are
bilayer .
smallest cell is Mycoplasma gallisepticum > The longest cell in human body is Neuron - The biggest cell is egg of Ostrich ✰ Schilden and Schwan established cell theory in the year 2822-39 . * Germplasm theory was proposed by August Weisman Mais features of the cell theory : Allogism are composed of cell 2 Body of every organism is made of cell 2 Each cell arises from pre - existing cell . 14 Every organism starts its life from single cell . Cable are of two kind :
2. Prokaryotic cell : These are primitive cell having three Basicstructure of typical cell but lack nuclear membrane . Near material is present in a region of cytoplasm called nudeoid . Other membrane bound organelles are absent such as mitochondria , lysosome , golgi bodies ' Ex - Bacteria and cynobacteria are Prokaryotes . tmber of Mitochondria in bacterial cell is zero . The smallest known prokaryotic organismis Mycoplasma . AB Prokaryotes have cell wall except mycoplasma . In photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria chlorophyll is associated with membranous vesicles . cat prokarotes , the chromosome number is one .
Function : regulates movement molecules ins and criside of The membrane is selectively permeable to molecule present on either side of it . Cell membrane is flexible and enables the cell to engulf many materials
3. Protoplasm The whole fund present inside plasma membrane is protoplasm . The name protoplasm is given by Purkene in 1839. Protoplasm is made up of various chemical substances like water , ions ; salt and organic molecule . It is the living part of cell : Protoplasm is divided into two parts :
A. Cytoplasm . The fluid found outside the nuclear membrane .
B. Nucleoplasm The fluid found inside the nuclear membrane . 99 % of protoplasm is made up of oxygen ( 76 % ) , carbon ( 10.5 % ) , hydrogen ( 10 % ) and nitrogen ( 25 % ) . 50 % of protoplasm is water .
The ratio of inorganic and organic compound found in protoplasm is $ 1 : 19 .
4. Mitochondria Discovered by Altman in the year 1886 . These are cylindrical , rod shaped or spherical structure found in cytoplasm . It is surrounded by double layered Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Vacuole are larger in size
Cell becomes turgid because of endosmosis . The process of imbibition involves both diffusion and capillary action . A cell increases in volume when it is placed in hypotonic solution . When fresh egg place in salt water , it floats . A cell will lose water when it is placed in a medium with lower concentration of water . Chromosome Chromosomes are thread like structure found in the nucleus as chromatin material . It becomes visible during cell division . Each chromosome is made up of two chromatids joined together at a point known as centromere - Bead like structures are found on
Nucleoside
Nucleotide

2. Nitrogenous base of the two strands of a double helix form a pair with the help of hydrogen bonds . Adenine pairs with thymine where as guanine pairs with " cytosine . Adenine and thymine are complementary to each other where as cytosine is complementary to guanine . Hydrogen bonding between nitrogenous base holds the two strands together . This structure can be compared with the steps of spiral staircase . Number of hydrogen bond found between guanine and cytosine are three . > Adenine pairs with thymine or vice versa by double hydrogen bond . Hydrophilic nature of DNA is due to presence of ki phosphate bond .
chromosomes is called gene . Gene are made up of DNApna_kiran ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) which are the carrier of genetic information from generation to generation . In some viruses RNA is the genetic material called retrovirus . In prokaryotes there is only one chromosome , like bacteria and virus . Chromosomes are made up of DNA and protein .. Chromosome was named by Waldeyer in 1888 capable of self replication , which transmit coded information from one generation to other . Eukaryotic cell possess many chromosome . A particular kind of species have definite number of chromosome in their cell , which are in pair known as diploid . The set of unpaired chromosome is called haploid . Gametes have haploid set of chromosome .
Function :

1. It contain genetic information in coded form , responsible for controlling hereditary characters .

2. DNA synthesise RNA .
Note : DNA is mainly found in nucleus . In small amount it is also found in mitochondria and chloroplast Phosphorous is an essential constituent of nucleic acid . Sub unit of DNA is nucleotide . Gene : Gene is hereditary unit which is made by a special segment of DNA found on the chromosome . Any change in the base sequance within gene is called mutation . DNA replication takes place when chromatix is opened up .
B. Ribonucleic Acid ( RNA ) RNA is single stranded nucleic acid made up of phosphate , ribose sugar and nitrogen base uracil , adenine , guanine and cytosine . It is found in nucleus as well as cytoplasm .. RNA molecule which act as enzymes are known as riboenzyme .
Number of Chromosomes in Different Organisms Pigeon Chimpanzee
80 Dog
78 Horse
48 Potato
48 Human 42 Ca
Rabbit
44 Wheat
Frog
26 Tomato .
House fly Nucleic Acid : Nucleic acid is a complex organic . compound found in cell . It contain special genetic instruction in coded form . Nucleic acids are of two kinds―
A. Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid ( DNA ) : Frederic Meischerwas the first who isolated DNA from the nucleus of pus cells . DNA is a macro molecule in which large number of nucleotidesarepresent . Chemicallyanucleotidehasthree components .
1. Nitrogen base
2. Deoxyribose or ribose sugar
3. Phosphate group .
12 Mosquito
Ascaris
RNA is of three kind ::

1. Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) : It brings message from DNA found in the nucleus to cytoplasm in the coded form . Ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) : Present in ribosome which is the site of protein synthesis . Transfer RNA ( tRNA ) It is the carrier of amino acid and transfer it to the ribosome . Function : Synthesis of protein . Join on Telegram @apna channels

5. Genetics mad
Transmission of character from one generation to next generation is called heredity . The process of transfer of hereditary character from generation to generation is called genetics . The name genetics : was first coined by W. Wattson in 1905 . Johannes was first used the name gene in 1909 . > Gregar Johan Mendal was the first who gave the idea of heredity based on his experiment in 1822-1884 . He is also known as father of genetics . Mendal chosen gorden pea plant for his experiment Mendal made a cross between two pure plant having contrasting character for single trait called monohybrid cross i.e. tall and dwarf plant for height . Monohybrid Cross
Difference between RNA and DNA
DNA
RNA
eaxtabase type .
Sugar
Sugar is ribose hype .
It contains the base adenine , It contains uracil at the place thymineandcytosineandguanine of thymine
It is double stranded structure . Iis mainly found in nucleus .
Itissinglestrandedstructure .. 11 is found in both nucleus and cytoplasm
Cell cycle : It is the sequence of events in which cell duplicates its genetic material , synthesise the other constituents of cell and ultimately divide into two daughter cell . Cell Division : The process in which cell increase in their number is called cell division . It is needed for growth , development and repair of body . There are mainly two kind of cell division- Mitosis : Mitosis cell division generally occur in somatic cell which take part in growth , repair and development .. in unicellular organism asexual reproduction takes place by this type of cell division .
TT ( tall plant ) .
tt ( Dwarf plant ) .
Cross pollination
Tt ( All are tall )
generation
Self pollination .
generation
Significance of Mitosis :
1 ) After Mitosis cell division one cell divided into two daughter cell in which number of chromosome is equal to the parent cell
TT : ( 25 % tall )
Tt ( 50 % tall hybrid )
( 25 % Dwarf )
Phenotypic ratio : 3 : 1 Genotypic ratio

2. Uncontrolled Mitosis may cause tumor or cancerousona kir growth .
B. Meiosis :
1. Meiosis cell division occur in reproductive cell . This type of division takes place during the formation of haploid gamete , ie , ora & sperm . 2 It is also known as reduction division during which each daughter cell have haploid number of chromosome ,
3. Four daughter cells are produced from one meiotic cell
1 : 2 : 1
Dihybrid cross : Mendal made a cross between two pure plant having two pair of contrasting character i.e. colour and shape of seed called dihybrid cross . He made a cross between plant having round seed with yellow colour and wrinkled seed with green colour . пуу ( Round & yellow seed ) ( Wrinkled & green ) e des
division .
Significance of Meiosis Meiosis and fertilization are two important feature of sexual reproduction that create genetic diversity . Terms related to cytology : Karyokinesis : Division of nucleus during cell division is called Karyokinesis . Cytokinesis : Division of cytoplasm is called cytokinesis . Diploid : Two complete set of chromosome is called diploid , found in somatic cell . Haploid : Single set of chromosome in cell is called haploid , found in gametes , Crossing over : Exchange of genetic material between two non sister chromatids takes place during meiosis cell division is called crossing over . Homologous , chromosome : A pair of chromosome . having samesizeandshapebearing corresponding gene . Allele : Altemativeform of characters governed by gene . Phenotype : The character of organism which can be seen directly or phenotypicaly . Genotypex Genetic constitution of organism is called genotype .
Gametes RY
Cross Pollination
F generation : Rry ( All are round and yellow seed ) .
F - generation : Self pollination
RY .
" " "
RRYY RRYY RrYY RrYy round round round . round . yellow yellow yellow
RY .
yellow
RrYy Rryy
RRYY RRyy round round yellow green
round round yellow BYY RrYy HYY round round wrinkled wrinkled
green
yellow yellow
yellow yellow
RrYy RryyrrYy rryy
round wrinkled wrinkled green yellow Phenotypic ratio of F , generation - 9 : 3 : 3 : 1 Genotypic ratio : 1 : 2 : 1 : 2 : 4 : 2 ; 1 : 2 : 1 On the basis of mono and dihybrid cross Mendal propose Join on Telegram @apna_channels
round .
yellow
green

1. Law of paired unit : Mendal proposed that when two dissimilar unit factors are present in an individual only one is able to express . One that expresses itself is dominant unit factor while other which fail to express is recessive unit factor . For example tallness is dominant over dwarfness .
2. Law of dominance : Offspring of cross breed parent only show dominant characters in F , generation .
The gene which exhibits multiple effects is called pleiotropic . When one gene pair hide the effect of other unit , it is called epistasis . DNA fingerprinting is a technique used for the detection of disputed parentage . Reverse transcription was discovered by Temin &

3. Law of segregation : In F₂ generation both the character which is governed by gene is separated ...
4. Law of independent assortment : During dihybrid and tribhybrid cross two or three pair of characters are taken . These characters segregate separately without depending on other in F₂ generation . Term related to genetics :
Baltimore .
Targeted drug delivery and gene therapy are made possible by the use of nanotechnology in health sector . Bt brinjal is a genetically engineered form of brinjal has been developed to make it pest resistant . A functional chromosomes cannot be created by joining segment of DNA taken from the cells of different species . In recent development of science a piece of artificial functional DNA can be created in laboratories . Genetic predisposition of some people is the reason of multi - drug resistarice in microbial pathogens . > Taking incorrect doses of antibiotic to cure disease is the reason of developing multi - drug resistance . In sexual reproduction both chromosome number and DNA content remain constant for both parent and offspring ..
Linkage Linkage is an exception of Mendel law . When two different gene are present on the same chromosome they express themself together instead of independently . This phenomenon is known as Linkage . The word linkage first coined by Morgan ( 1910 ) . > Mutation : A sudden change in the gene which is heritable from one generation to other . The term Mutation was first coined by Hugo De Vries . Variation : When characters are transmitted from one generation to next generation there is some change . Change in characters by recombination of gene in offspring . So , they looks different from their parents . This phenomenon is known as Variation . Chromosomal aberrations : Any change inchromosomal structure is known as Chromosomal aberrations .
Cas I protein is a molecular scissors used in targeted gene editing which is often mentioned in news . In normal cell , the process of the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA is called transcription .
Cloning : It is a process of producing identical organisapna_kiran from a single cell having same genetic character as his mother . Ex : Sheep Dolly was produced from single cell . > Dolly was assigned to the world's first clone of an adult . animal by the British Scientists . Totipotency : It is the potential ability of a plant cell to grow in a complete plant . Pluripotency : It is the potential ability of a cell to develop into any kinds of the cell of animal body . ex - stem cell Genetically modified organism ( GMO ) : Manipulation of gene by cutting or joining the segment of DNA to get desired varieties of organism is called genetically modified organism . This is also known as genetic engineering . Autosomes : Chromosomes found in cell which are responsible for characters other than sex are called
In Eukaryotic cells genes present in the cytoplasm kir are found in the mitochondria and inherited via egg Cytoplasm . Passing on mitochondrial diseases from parent to child can be prevented by mitochondrial replacement therapy either before or after in - vitro fertilization of egg A child inherits mitochondrial diseases entirely from mother and not from father . Extranuclear genes occur in mitochondria inherited by female . Chromosomal theory of inheritance was given by
Slutton & Boveri

6. Sex Determination in Human In human male sex chromosome is XY ' , where as in female sex chromosome is ' XX ' . During gamete formation in male half of the sperm contain ' X ' chromosome while other . half contain ' Y ' Chromosome . In female all gametes contain only one type of chromosome that is ' X ' . Thus when a male gamete i.e. sperm carrying ' X ' chromosome fertilize an ova , the zygote develop into female . When a sperm carrying . Y chromosome fertilizes an egg , zygote develops into male .
autosomes .
Sex chromosome : The pair of chromosome which determine the sex of organism is called sex chromosome . Human have 23 pair of chromosomes in which 22 pair are autosomes and one pair is sex chromosome . Genome : All gene present in a haploid cell.is called genome . Plasmagen : Gene which are found in organelles of cytoplasm called plasmagen . Cistron : Functional unit of gene is called cistron . ☐ Muton : Unit of gene responsible for mutation . - Recon : Unit of gene take part in recombination . " Note S.Benzer ( 1962 ) had given the
Male
Female
Pares
· 50 %
( 50 %
Gameles
( XY )
Offsp
Female Male Female
Barr body is found in female somatic cells
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Carolus Linnaeus ( 1707-1778 ) contribution to classification provide an evolutionary relationship among the organism . He was also supported an idea that no species is new . Each and every species originates from some pre - existing species . He wrote ' species plantarum ' , and proposed binomial system of nomenclature .
2. Jean Baptist Lamarck ( 1744-1829 ) tried to explain the evolutionary process in his book Philosophic zoologique . The theory proposed by Lamark is known as theory of inheritance of acquired characters . According to this theory use and disuse of an organ lead to acquiring change in the features of that organ . These changes are also inherited to offspring . The favourable changes after long period of time result in evolution of new species . But Lamarckism was very strongly criticised by August Weismann .

3. Charles Robert Darwin ( 1809-1882 ) explain the evolutionary principle in his book ' The origin of species ' . The theory proposed by him is popularly known as ' Theory @apnof natural selection ' or Darwinism . Darwin explained that despite having the enormous potential of fertility , the population of organism remains within a limit . It is due to struggle between members of same species and different species for food , space and mate . Struggle eliminates the unfit individual . The fit organism posses some variations which are favourable and they can leave the progeny to continue the favourable variation . The variation when accumulated for long time give rise to origin of new species with progress in genetics , the sources of variation were explained and Darwin's theory was modified . Now the most accepted theory of evolution is Modern synthetic theory , in which origin of species is based on the interaction of genetic variation and natural selection :
ran

6. Phenylketonuria ; It is an inborn error of metabolism which result in mental retardation cause due to change in 12th autosomal chromosomes . 7. Haemophilia : Gene responsible for this disorder is linked with sex chromosomes . This disease lead to failure of blood clotting . 8. Colour blindness : This disorder lead to failure to distinguish red & green colour . The gene responsible for this disease is situated on sex chromosomes .

7. Organic Evolution
✓ Among permian , Triassic , Cretaceous and Jurassic geological era cretaceous is the newest one . The book which contains information about all rare and endangered species of plants , animals and fungi existing within the boundary of a state is . called red data book . Recapitulation theory was proposed by Erunst Haeckel The basic unit of biosystematica is species . The correct taxonomic hierarchy is - Kingdom : Phylum Class Order Family → Genes → Species . ☑At present phylogenetic classification systems based on evolutionary relationships between various organisms are acceptable . Numerical taxonomy of plant is based on all observable characteristics easily carried out using computers . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
More and more creation of organism by gradual change from low categories organism to higher organism is called . organic evolution . There are several evidence regarding organic evolution . Homologous organ : Organ which are seen different due to use in its function but internal structure and embryonic development are similar . Ex - Flipper of whale , feather of bat , forelimb of horse , Paw of cat and hands of human .
Analogous organ : Organ which looks similar due to be used in similar function but their internal structure and embryonic development are different . Ex - Wings of butterfly , bats and birds all looks similar but their internal structure and origin are different . Vestigial organ . These are organs which appear functionless in an organism but was functional in their

1. Study of fungi is called Mycology . Organism of this group may be unicellular or multicellular .
2. Fungi is without chlorophyll , central carrier tissue less , Thallophyta .
3. Accumulated food in fungi remains as Glycogen .
4. Its cell wall is made up of chitin . Ex . Albugo , Phytophthora , Mucor , Yeast etc.
Theophrastus is called the father of Botany . Aristotle is known as father of biology .

1. Classification of Plantae In the year 1883 , Elchler has classified the Botanical world as under :
Plant Kingdom

5. Thin thread like structure formed by many fungi are called hyphae .. Fungi may creates serious diseases in plants . Most of the damage is caused by rust and smut . Main Fungal diseases in plants are as White rust of crucifer , Loose smut of wheat , Rust of wheat , early Blight of potato , Red rot of sugarcane , Tikka diseases of groundnut , Wart disease of potato , Brown leaf spot of rice , Late blight of potato , Damping off of seedlings
Cryptogams . ( Plant without seed
Phanerogams ( flower & Seed bearing plant )
& flower )
Thallophyta Bryophyta Pteridophyta .
Algae Fungi
Gymnospermae Angiospermae
etc.
Monocotyledons
Dicotyledons
Yeast belongs to group fungi used in making bread . Rhizopus is a fungi commonly known as ' bread mould ' . Heterothallism in fungi was discovered by AF Blakelee Alfa - toxins are produced by fungi . Lichens are the association of algae and fungi . Lichens developing on rocky substrates are called saxicolous ..

1. Cryptogamous Plants ( Non - flowering Plant ) There are no flower and seed in these types of plants . These are classified into following groups .:
( A ) Thallophyta :

1. This is the largest group of the plant kingdom .
2. The body of plants of this group is thallus like i.e. , plant are not differentiated into root , stem and leaves .
3. It is the lower most group of plant kingdom .
Lichens are the first organism which colonise on bare Yeast is unicellular fungi reproduce through budding . The sexual reproductive organ of aspergillus are antheridium and ascogonium Some mushrooms have medicinal properties where as other have psychoactive properties . Some mushroom have insecticidal properties . Some of the mushroom also have bioluminescent properties .. Litmus is obtain from Lichen which is a symbiotic association of algae fungi .
VS V. V. V.

4. There is no conducting tissue . It is divided into two groups . ( a ) Algae and ( b ) Fungi
( a ) Algae

1. The study of algae is called Phycology .
2. The algae normally have chlorophyll and autotrophic mode of nutrition . . .
3. Its body is thallus like . It may be unicellular , colonial or filamentous .
4. Classification of the group algae is based on nature of pigment .
Example Red algae
Rhodophyta Chlamydomonas
( B ) Bryophyta
Green algae
This is the first group of land plants . In this division approximately 25,000 species are included
1. In bryophyta there is lack of xylem and phloem tissue .
2. Plant body may be of thallus like or leafy erect structure as in moss ..
3. They lack true roots , stem and leaves :
4. This community is also called Amphibian category of the plant kingdom . Bryophytes include various mosses like Funaria , Polytrichum Sphgnum etc. group of Bryophytes is Liverworts like Riccia , Marchantica etc.
Brown algae Sargassum
Useful Algae :

1. As a food : Porphyra , Ulva , Sargassum , Laminaria , Nostoc etc.
2. In making lodine : Laminaria , Fucus , Echlonia etc ..
3. As a manure : Nostoc , Anabana , kelp etc.
4. In making medicines : Antibiotic Chlorelline from Chlorella and Tincher iodine is made from Laminaria . 5. In research works : Chlorella , Acetabularia , Belonia etc. > Spirogyra is commonly known as Pond Silk . Note : An astronaut can get protein food , water and oxygen by sowing the chlorella algae in the tank of the aircraft so chlorella is known as space algae . Agar is prepared from algae like Gelidium and Gracilaria . It is used to grow microbes and inpreparation of icecreams and jelly .
• Other 8
Water conduction takes place in mosses through parenchyma The moss namely Sphagnum is capable of soaking water 18 times of its own weight . Therefore , gardeners used it to protect from drying while taking the plants from one place to another . Join on Telegram @apna channels

4. Tannin - It is useful in tanning and making in plants on
The Sphagnum moss is used as fuel .

5. Resin - Resin is extracted from some conical plants which are used in making varnish , polish , paint etc.
The Sphagnum moss is also used as antiseptic .
( C ) Pteridophyta
Resin is the product of coniferous tree . Best example of polyembryony is citrus fruit . ( B ) Angiosperm ( Covered Seed )
1. In the plants of this sub - group seeds are found inside the fruits . ( Concealed Seeds )
2. In these plants root leaves , flowers , fruits and seeds are fully developed .. Plants of this sub - group have sced - coat in seeds . On the basis of number of cotyledons plants are divided into two categories
1. Monocotyledon and
2. Dicotyledon Monocotyledon plants : Those plants which have only one cotyledon in seed . Example :
The plants of this group are mostly found in wet shady places , forests and mountains .
1. The body of plants is differentiated into root , stem and leaves . Stem remains as normal rhizome . Reproduction occur by spores produced inside the sporangia . Sporangia bearing leaf of a fern is called ' Sorus ' . Gametophytic phase is short lived . The diploid zygote develop into an embryo . Gametophyte is called prothallus in pteridophytes .. Plants of this community have conducting tissues . But xylem does not contain vessels and phloem does not contain companion cells . Examples : Ferns , Azolla , Pteridium , Lycopodium etc. In the neck cell of archegonium of fern one binucleated cell is present . Mosses ( Bryophytes ) and ferns ( Pteridophytes ) are called amphibian of plant kingdom . Marsileo , Fern and Horse tail are example of pteridophyta . Fernand Fernalliesbelong to thekingdompteridophyta . Phanerogamous ( Flowering Plant ) Plants of this group is well developed . All the plant in this group bear flower , fruit and seed . Plants of this group can be classified into two sub - groups - Gymnosperm and Angiosperm . ( A ) Gymnosperm ( Naked Seed )
S. Name of category
1. Liliaceae
2. Palmac
3. Graminaceae
*** Name of main plants Garlic , Onion etc. Nut , Palm , Coconut , Date etc. Wheat , Maize , Bamboo , Sugarcane , Rice , Bajra , Oat etc. Dicotyledon plants : Those plants which have two cotyledon in its seed are called dicotyledons . Example : S. Name of category
Name of main plants : Radish , Turnip , Mustard etc .: Jute , Lady's finger
Cruciferae

2. Malvaceae
3. Leguminaceae
Babool , Lajwanti , Ashok , Tamarind and Pulses crops . Sunflower , Marigold , Lily etc. Lemon , Orange etc.

4. Composite 5. Rutaceae pnackCucurbitaceae
@apn
Melon , Water melon , Guard bitter etc. Potato , Chilly , Brinjal , Belladonna , Tomato etc Strawberry , Apple , Almond etc. Water goes up through xylem vessels in tall trees . The process in plants and properties of water that help in upward movement are traspiration pull , cohesion and adhesion .

1. These plants are in the forms of trees and bushes . Plant body are differentiated into root , stem & leaves .

7. Solanaceae . 8. Rosaceae

2. Plants are woody , perennial and tall . Plant bear naked seed .
3. Its tap roots are well developed .

4. Pollination takes place through air .
Leaves are the lung of plant .
The longest plant of the Plant kingdom , Sequoia .
Plant from which coca and chocolate are obtained is a shurb .
gigentia comes under it . Its height is 120 meters . This is also called Red Wood of California .
Banana is a shurb .
The smallest plant is Zaimia Pygmia .
Trochodendron is a vesselless angiosperm .
> Living fossils of plant are Cycas , Ginkgo biloba and Metasequoia .
Pulses are obtained from the family Leguminacae .
From the bark of cinchona a drug quinine is obtained used in malaria fever .
Ginkgo biloba is also called Maiden hair tree .
Ovule and Antherozoids of Cycas is largest in Plant kingdom . Corolloid root of cycas help in absorption of water and fixation of nitrogen . The pollen grains of Pinus are so much in number that later it turns into Sulphur showers . Importance of Gymnosperm As a food - Sago is made by extracting the juice from the stems of Cycas . Therefore , Cycas is called Sago - palm .
" Chloroplast found in sugarcane plant shows dimorphism . The maximum fixation of solar energy is done by green plant . Golden rice contain ẞ - carotene gene which comes from carrote . It is a variety of rice produced by genetic engineering to biosynthesis of ẞ - carotene , a precursor of vitamin
A. Potato , Tomato and Brinjal are three different species . but all belong to genus Solonum . Alphanso is a mango variety which is mostly exported from India . The botanical name of macroni wheat is Triticum durum . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
2 Wood - The wood of Pine , Sequoia , Deodar , Spruce etc is used for making furniture . Vapour oil We get Tarpin oil from the trees of Pine , Cedrus oil from Deodar tree and Cedcast oil from Juniperous wood .

3. They cause disease like bacteria & fungi .
According to parasitic nature , virus is of three types-
1. Plant virus - RNA is present as nucleic acid in 75 % plant virus . Some have DNA as nucleic material .
2. Animal virus - DNA or sometimes RNA is found in it .
3. Bacteriophage - A virus that infects and replicates within bacteria . They kill the bacteria . Example - T - 2 phage . Bacteriophages are composed of nucleic acid molecule : surrounded by a protein sheath . > In man virus cause disease like mumps , chicken pox , hepatitis , polio , AIDs , Herpes etc. ➤ HIV often change its structure due to the presence of an enzyme reverse transcriptase . Mutation in a virus is caused due to a change in its genetic material .
The enzyme integrase produced by virus allow the integration of HIV - DNA into the host cell DNA . > EBOLA is a virus , causes ebola fever . Fruit Bats are the natural host of this virus , first outbreak in West Africa . Note : Those viruses in which RNA is found as genetic material are called Retrovirus .
Viruses are parasite which need living cell to reproduce . Outside host it is similar to chemical substance . Generally Virus have no enzyme of their own . Many plant and vertebrate animals produce an antiviral substance which inhibits the multiplication of virus called interferon . Water of holy Ganga river is pure due to presence of . bacteriophages . The term ACE - 2 is talked about in context of spread of
Name :
Name
Tomato
Lycopersican esculentum
Tamarind Tamarindus indica
Solanum tubersum . Papaya Pisum sativam
¡ Potato
Carica papaya
Pea
Citrus limonium
Lemon
Zea mays ………………… · disease . Jack fruit Artocarpus integra pha_kiran
Solanum melongena Ginger Banana Carrot Cucumber Cucumis sativas : Musa paradisicum Apple Daucas carota
Brinjal
Zingiber officinale Pyrus malus Coriander Coriandrum sativum Capsicum Capsicum fruitscence ... Tobacoo Nicotina tobaccum Turmeric Curcuma longa Glycine max
Virus cannot be cultured in artificial synthetic medium . Bacteria It was discovered by Antony Von Leeuwenhook of Holland in the year 1683 . > Leeuwenhook is called the father of Bacteriology . In the year 1829 Ehrenberg called it bacteria . The year 1843-1892 - Robert Koch discovered the bacteria of Tuberculosis diseases . > The year 1812-1892 - Louis Pasteur discovered the vaccine of Rabies and pasteurization of milk . On the basis of shape , bacteria are of different types .
1. Bacillus : This is rod - like or cylindrical .
2. Round or Cocus : These are round and the smallest " bacteria .
3. Comma shaped or Vibrio : Like the English sign ( , ) example - Vibrio cholerae etc.
4. Spirillum : Spring or screw shaped Some species of Azotobacter , Azospirillum and Clostridium bacteria live freely in the soil and fix . atmospheric nitrogen into the nitrogenous compound . The Bacteria capable of converting nitrite to nitrate is nitrosomonas . Anabaena and Nostoc cynobacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen into soil . The species of Rhizobium like Bradyrhizobium bacteria live in the roots of the Leguminous plants capable of converting atmospheric nitrogen into its compound . Example - Peas , Pegion Peas , Gram etc. Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Garlic
Allium sativum
Onion
Allium cepa
Orange
Citrus aurantium . Soybean .
Radish
Raphanus sativus
Ficus religiosa
Peepal
Rice
Oryza sativa
Psidium guava
Guava
Spinach
Lactuca sativa
Ficus benghalensis
Banyan
Sunflower Helianthus annus
Syzygium aromaticum Curry leaf Murraya koenigil
Clove
Tulsi
Ocimum sanctum
Virus
Study of virus is called virology . Virus was discovered by Russian scientist Ivanovsky in the year 1892. ( During the tests of Mosaic disease in tobacco ) . In nature , there are ultra microscopic particle known as viruses . It has both the characters of living and non living , so it Is a connecting link between living & non living . Dr. Stanley first isolated the virus causing mosaic disease in tobacco in the form of crystals .
Characters of virus
Virus is made up of nucleic acid and protein .
1. They became active inside a living cells or host cell .
2. Nucleic acids replicate themselves and they reproduce rapidly .

2. Plant Morphology
Morphology : The study of form and features of different parts of plants like roots , stems , leaves , flowers , fruits etc is called Morphology .
Root
Root is the descending part of the plant which develops
from radicle .
> Root hairs arises from epidermis . Root generally grows in the soil away from light . Roots are of two types-

1. Tap root and
2. Adventitious root . Modification of Tap roots are-
1. Conical - like Carrot
2. Napiform - like Turnip , beet etc.
3. Fusiform - like Radish .. > Rootless plant is lemma Stem
This is the part of a plant which grows towards light . So , they are usually positively phototrophic .
It develops from plumule . The modification of stems are as under- Stem of plant help in distributing food to all parts of the plant . Beside this it also help in storing of food . Shaping the plant , respiration and photosynthesis . Underground stem
-Penicillin
Xenobiotics are inherently resistant to microbial attack are called recalcitrant . Microbial type culture collection centre is situated at Chandigarh .
@ apna_kira @ orm - like Colocasia , Saffron etc.

1. Tuber - like Potato .
Honey has high concentration of sugar does not decay because bacteria can not survive in a solution of high osmotic strength as water is drawn out . Bacteria are useful for commercial as well as industrial application like fermentation , production of vaccine , cleaning of oil spills and producing other bioactive

3. Bulb like Onion , Garlic etc.

4. Rhizome – like Turmeric , Ginger etc. Leaf > It is green . Its main function is synthesis of food through photosynthesis .
molecules :
In cactus leaves are modified into spines .
Bacterial decomposition of biological material under anaerobic condition is called composting .
Cactus is referred as xerophyte ...
The most extensive use of molasses after fermentation is for producing ethanol . Among fungi , virus ; bacteria and protozoa the phototrophic nutrition is only found in Bacteria . Bacteria having flagella all over the body is known as peritrichous . Legumes fix nitrogen only through the specialized bacteria that live in their roots nodules . Nitrifying bacteria like Nitrosomonas and Nitrobactar convert ammonia or ammonium compounds into nitrates . Bacterial genome contains DNA without histone . Escherichia coli commonly lives in animal and human intestine . In bacteria plasmid is extra - chromosomal DNA : The most important bacteria which produce maximum number of antibiotics is streptomyces . Antibiotics are the chemical substance , produced by living microorganism capable of inhibiting or destroying other microbes .
Phyllotaxy refers to pattern of arrangement of leaves .
Flower
Clove is obtained from flower bud . Flower is the reproductive part of plant . In flower Calyx , Corolla , Androecium and Gynoecium are found . Out of these androecium is male sex organ and the gynoecium is female sex organ . Androecium : Unit of androecium is stamen . There are one or more stamens in the androecium . Pollen grains are found in anther . Gynoecium : Unit of gynoecium is carpel or pistil . There are three parts of carpel-
1. Ovary , 2.Style and
3. Stigma . Flower having both stamen and carpel is called bisexual
flower .
Pollination : After maturation of Anther , the process of transfer of pollen grains to stigma is called pollination . Pollination is of two types-

1.Self - pollination Cross - pollination
Join on Telegram @apha channels

4. Photosynthesis
Protosynthesis is a process in which green pla synthesis their food like glucose from carbondioxide and water in presence of sun light with the help of chlorophy Light Chlorophyll
CH2O + 6H₂O + 60 , Glucose Water Org Carbon dioxide , water , chlorophyll and sunlight . recessary for photosynthesis . Terrestrial plants takes CO , from atmosphere where aquatic plants use carbon dioxide disolve in water . Water enters into the cells of the leaves through oso and CO , through diffusion from atmosphere or release during respiration . Water necessary for photosynthesis is absorbed by root Oxygen produced during photosynthesis is to photolysis of water ,
ECO₂ + 12H₂O
plants made up of macks , veselos , podigne calls and fom . The main function
Xem pace is made up of living cells . cency Vytep in trasportion of water and derived mirenis for the sol to the stems and leaves . ovides mechanical strength to the plaza modisa valable raw maunas , The fofory of elements are called
***** Join on Telegram @anach the plan due to
our is
channels
me prese

5. Ethylene : This is the only hormone found in gaseous form . In 1962 Burg proven it as harmonie , Functions : It helps in the ripening the fruits It increases the number of female flowers . It motivates the separation of leaves , flowers and fruits . Cas used for artificial ripening of fruit is ethane or ethylene . 6. Florigens : It is produced in leaves but helps in blooming of the flowers . Therefore , it is also called flowering : hormones . 7. Traumatin : This is a type of dicarboxylic acid . It is formed in injured cells by which the injury of plants is healed . The concept of tissue culture was introduced by Haberlandt The plant growth regulator are small , simple molecules of diverse chemical composition . They are indole compound , adenine derivative carotenoids and terpenes . Growth of plant without soil is known as hydrophonics . For the growth of plant sodium is not an essential component . Growth of plant is measured by device crescograph Join on Telegram @apha channels

5. Plant Hormones .
Following five hormones are found in plants : Auxins Auxins was discovered by Darwin in the year 1880 .

6. Plant Diseases
Example and details .
Facts Smallest ( in shape ) angiosperm plant Plant with largest leaf
Lemna . This is aquatic angiosperm which is found in India too . Victoria regia . This is an aquatic plant which is found in West Bengal in India Lodoicea . This is also called , double coconut . This is found in Kerala in India Azolla . This is an aquatic plant . Orchid . Wolfia . Its diameter is 0.1 millimeter . Reflesia arnoldii . Its diameter is 1 meter and its weight can be 8 kilograms . Arceuthobium is a parasite on the stems of gymnosperms . Cycas . This is a gymnosperm plant .

1. Viral Diseases :
( a ) Mosaic disease of tobacco : In this disease leaves get shrinked and become small . The chlorophyll of leaves get destroyed . The factor of this disease is Tobacco Mosaic Virus ( TMV ) known as bacteriophage . Control - Affected plants should be burnt . ( b ) . Bunchy top of banana : This diseases is caused by banana virus . In this disease plants become dwarf and all the leaves get accumulated like a rose on the branch . ( c ) Yellow Vein Mosaic of Bhendi : It is a viral disease caused by virus affecting okra plants . This disease is transmitted by insects and white fly .
Largest seed
Smallest Pteridophyta Smallest seed Smallest flower Largest flower
Smallest angiosperm parasite Largest male couplet Largest seed - egg Alive fossil

2. Bacterial Disease :
( a ) Wilt of Potato : It is also known as ring disease because brown ring is formed on the xylem . The factor of this disease is Pseudomonas solonacearum bacteria . In this disease the conduction system of the plant is affected . Black Arm of cotton : The factor of this disease is Xanthomonas Bacteria . In this disease a water soaked round spot ( brown ) is formed on the leaves . ( c ) Bacterial blight of Rice : This disease is caused by Xanthomonas oryzae bacteria . Yellow - greenish spot is seen on both side of leaves . Vascular bundles get blocked due to bacterial growth . ( d ) Citrus Canker : The factor of this disease is Xanthomonas citri bacteria . It has originated in China . Leaves , branches , fruits all are affected by this disease . ( e ) Tundu disease of wheat : The factors of this disease are Corinobacterium titricibacteria and Enzuina Titikiona Nematode . In this disease lower parts of the leaves are faded and turned yellow . Fungal Diseases : The diseases included in this group are caused by fungi . Rust of wheat is a disease caused by fungi Puccinia . Damping off seedling is caused by fungus Pythium debaryanum . Red root of sugarcane is caused by fungus colleto- · trichum falcatum . Sahu disease of wheat is caused by insect . Disease caused due to deficiency of element Disease Deficiency of Element Little leaf of mango and brinjal Zinc ( Zn )
Cycas
Cycas .
Smallest chromosomes In algae .
Longest chromosomes
In Trillium .
The plant with the largest Ophioglossum ( Fern ) . There are 1266 number of chromosomes Chromosome . The plant with the least Heplapapopus gracilis number of chromosomes Thesmallestgymnosperm Zamia pygmea .
plant ,
Carnivorous plant
Sundew , Venus flytrap , Pitcher plant
The heaviest wooden plant Hardwichia binata . The lightest wooden plant Ochroma lagopus - balsa . The smallest cell Fruit like a tennis ball kiraa Fire of the forest Mycoplasma gallisepticum . Kenth
Dhak
Coffee giving plant
Coffea arabica . Caffin contains i Theobroma cococa . Theobromin Icaffeine contain in it . Papaver somniferum ( opium plant ) morphine is obtain from fruit coat ( pod ) Decomposing green legume . Bud of flower
Coco giving plant
Morphine
Green manure
Clove
Stigma of flower .
Saffron
> The elements nitrogen , phosphorus and potassium are known as primary nutrient for plant …
' '
> Iron ( Fe ) , Zinc ( Zn ) , Manganese ( Mn ) , Copper ( Cu ) , Boron ( B ) , Molybdenum ( Mo ) , Chlorine ( Cl ) and Nickel ( Ni ) , are the micronutrient of plants require in small
Copper ( Cu )
Dieback of lemon
Copper ( Cu )
Little leaf of lemon
amounts .
Manganese ( Mn )
Marsh disease or pea

7. Ecology
Black heart disease of potato
> Study of inter relationship between living organisms ... and their environment . > Environment include both biotic and abiotic factors .
Boron
Microsis of amia
Potassium ( K )
Burning of leaf of litchi
bud in maize , Khaira Zinc ( Zn )
disease of paddy
Various population of living in a definite geographical region is called Biotic Community .
Koter spot of Turnip
Calcium ( Ca ) , Molybdenum ( Mo )
Some Important Facts in Botany
Ecosystem or Ecological system word was first coined by the scientist namely , Tansley , Every ecosystem is made up of two components- ( A ) Biotic component - Living part
Example and detai rgest angiosperm tree Eucalyplus . cagest tree in the world Sequoia giganteum . This is a gymnosperm Its height is 120 meter . This is also called
Join on Telegram @apria channele

8. Nitrogen cycle
( A ) .
Nitrogen fixation is a process in which free atmospheric nitrogen is converted by living organism into nitrogenous compound that can be used by plant . Ammonification : Formation of ammonia from organic compound like proteins and nucleic acid by micro organism . Nitrification : A process in which ammonia is converted into nitrites and ritrates by Nitrobacteria . Plants use nitrogen mostly in the form of nitrate . Denitrification : It is the process of converting fix nitrogen like nitrates , nitrites and ammonia into free nitrogen by denitrifying bacteria eg Pseudomonas . Leg haemoglobin pigment is essential for nitrogen fixation by leguminous plants .

2. Consumer
3. Decomposers
Producer : Those components that make their own : food . Like green plants .

2. Consumer : Those components that consumes the food . made by plant . Consumers are of three types- ( a ) Primary consumers : In this category those organisms are included that lives on green plants or some parts of them . ( b ) Secondary consumers : In this category those organisms are included that depends on the primary consumers as their food . Like - fox , wolf , peacock etc. ( c ) : Tertiary consumers : In this category those organisms are included that depends on the secondary consumers . Like - Tiger , lion , cheetah etc.
3. Decomposers : Mainly fungi and bacteria are included in this category . These organisms decomposes dead producers and consumers and changes them into physical elements . ( B ) Abiotic components : Abiotic components are as follows-

9. Pollution
Unwanted changes in the chemical and physical features of air , water and land ( environment ) that are dangerous to human and other organisms , their life conditions ; industrial process and cultural achievements are called pollution . The types of pollution are mainly

1. Air pollution ,
3. Sound pollution , 5. Nuclear pollution .

2. Water pollution ,
4. Soil pollution ,

1. Carbonic substance
2. Non - carbonic substance .
3. Climatic factor

1. Air pollution : When pollutant are present in the atmosphere and the quality of atmosphere reduces then it @ais called Air pollution .
Example : water , sun - light , temperature , air , humidity , soil , minerals etc.
Food Chain Transfer of energy from the producer through a series of organisms .
* Maimair pollutants : Carbon monoxide ( CO ) , Sulphur dioxide ( SO2 ) , Hydrogen sulphide ( HS ) , Hydrogen fluoride ( HF ) , Nitrogen oxide ( NO and NO ) , Hydrocarbon , Ammonia ( NH3 ) , Smoke of tobacco , Fluorides smoke.and particles of smoke , Aerosols etc. Carbonmonoxide get combine with hemoglobine more rapidly than oxygen . Sulphur dioxide ( SO ) , Sulphur trioxide ( SO ) , Nitrogen oxide ( NO ) react with environmental water and form Sulphuric acid and Nitric acid . These acids reach to the earth with rain water called acid rain . On 3rd December , 1984 an incidence of leakage of Methyl : isocyanate gas took place in the fertilizer making Union Carbide Factory ( Bhopal ) . . The most important indoor air pollutant is Radon gas .
2. Water pollution : Mixing of unwanted substances in water is called water pollution . > Only 2.5 to 3 % water present on the earth is usable . Sources of water pollution : The water pollution takes place mainly due to mixing up of Carbonate , sulphates of Magnesium and Potassium , Ammonia ; Carbon monoxide , Carbon dioxide and Industrial remains in water . Sea - water pollution is due to mixing up of heavy metals , hydro carbon , petroleum etc in water . Oil spill from the tanker spread soon on the surface of
Ex : Grass
→ Goat → ➤ Human .
Where grass is producer while goat and human are primary and secondary consumer . Man is primary as well as secondary consumer . The term steppe is associated with bio - region grass- lands . About 2 % of the world's land area is tropical rainforest . Beef is the world growing appetite for food product which is the leading cause of tropical deforestation . Two components of ecosystem are biotic and abiotic . The resources which are obtained by biosphere and have life called Biotic resources . B - Diversity is also known as ecosystem diversity . Biosphere reserve : An ecosystem with plants and animals protected by law to support conservation of natural resourses and help in learning as well as research for sustainable development . Dr. Dhrubajyoti Ghosh is associated with ecology , who work on the east Kolkata wetland and its wise use . Red Data Book deals with plants and animals on the verge of extinction : Destruction of natural habitat is the most important factor for the loss of Biodiversity . Thermosphere lies above the mesosphere in which region temperatures increases with height . The sphere of living matter together with water and soil on the surface of earth is called lithosphere .
sea water .
Contaminated water in which mercury is present cause Minimata disease . Pollution of river water is measured by oxygen ecosystem . Join on Telegram @apha channels
Rivers , streams and springs are the example of Lotic :

1. Classification of Animal Kingdom . Animals kingdom of the world is divided into two sub- kingdoms- ( A ) Non Chordata , ( B ) Chordata th ( A ) Non Chordata—
1. Unicellular animal ( Protozoan )
2. Multi - cellular animal ( Metazoan ) .. Unicellular animals are kept in a single phylum Protozoa whereas multi - cellular animals are divided into 9 . phylums .
Natural sources of air pollution are volcanic eruptions . The best indicator of SO2 pollution is lichen . Positive pollution of soil is due to excessive use of fertilizers . Green muffler is used against noise pollution . Photochemical smog formed in congested metropolitan cities mainly consist of ozone , peroxyacetyl nitrate and NO .... DDT is a non - biodegradable pollutant . Population , Biotic Community Population : Population is a group of individuals of same species occupying the same area at a given time . Population density : Total number of individual present in per unit area . Natality : Increase in the number of individual in a given population by birth is called natality . Mortality : Number of individuals removed from a population due to death under given environmental condition at a given time is called mortality . Biotic potential : It refers the maximum capacity of inherent of an organism to reproduce . Environmental factor : Environmental factors , which put a check on the growth of population . Mutalism It is a functional association between two different species in which both the species are benefited . Commensalism : It is an association between individuals of two different species in which one species is benefited and other one is neither benefited nor affected . Population Explosion : The dramatic increase in population size over a relatively short period is called
@apna
Classification of animals according to Storer and : Usinger .
A. Phylum Protozoa : Main features : Unicellular
1. It's body is made of only one cell .
2. There may be one or more nuclei in its cytoplasm .
3. It is parasitic or free living .

4. All metabolic activity ( Intake of food , digestion , respiration , excretion , reproduction ) takes place in unicellular body . 5. Respiration and excretion take place by diffusion . Example - Amoeba , Euglena , Trypanosoma etc ..
B. Phylum Porifera : All animals of this group are found in marine water & bear pores on body . 1
1. These are multicellular animals but cells do not make . regular tissues .
2. Numerous pores known as ostia found on body wall .
3. Skeleton is made up of minute calcareous or silicon spicules ...
Example - Sycon , Sponge etc , Sponges are also used as sound absorber , Organisms of porifera are called Sponges .
C. Phylum Coelenterate ( Cnidaria ) : Main features Coelenteron is present inside body . First tissue grade organisation is found .
1. Animals are aquatic and diploblastic .
2. Around the mouth some thread - like structure are found known as tentacles , which help in holding or catching the food . population in on Telegram @apna channels

4. There is no circulatory and respiratory systems bubapa , fishylum Mollusca : Main features : Soft bodies animal
nervous system is present ... 5. Excretion takes place through Protonephridia .
Body is soft divided into head and muscular foot .
2. Mantle is always present in it , which secretes a hard calcareous shell around body .
3. Alimentary canal is well developed .
4. Respiration takes place through gills or ctenidia . 5. Blood often has a blue colour respiratory pigment called hemocyanin . 6. Excretion takes place through kidneys . Example - Pila , Octopus , Loligo , Squid.etc , Other name in vogue . Sea rabbit
1 .

6. They are unisexual .

1.7 . Most form are parasitic but some are free living in soil and water . Example Round worm , like - Ascaris , Thread worm , Wuchereria , Ancylostoma etc .. Ancylostoma is also known as hook worm . Ascaris causes the disease : Ascarisis in human . It is found in small intestine of man . Note :
1. Enterobius ( pin worm / thread worm ) -It is found mainly in the anus of child . Children feel itching and often vomits . Some children urinate on the bed at night .
2. Filarial disease is caused by Wuchereria bancrofti : F. Phylum Annelida : Main features : Annulus body Bearing ring like structure .
Note : Mollusca Aplysia Doris ... Octopus Sepia
Sea lemon
Devil - fish
Cuttle - fish
Octopus have more than one heart . Haliotis belong to phyllum mollusca . Hemocyanin is an oxygen . transport metalloprotein containing two atoms of copper found in the blood of mollusca . Mollusca is the second largest phyllum of animalia . The largest spineless invertebrate creature in the world is colossal squid by weight . On the basis of size Giant squid is the largest spineless invertebrate comes under mollusca . Phylum Echinodermata : Main features : Spiny skin
1. All the animals of this group are marine .
2. Water vascular system is present . There is Tube feet for locomotion & taking food which Join on Telegram @apnaychannels

1. Body is long , thin , soft and metamerically segmented .
2. Locomotion takes place through Setae made up
Chitin .

3. Alimentary canal is well developed .
4. Normally respiration through skin , in some animals it takes place through gills , 5. Nervous system is present and blood is red . 6. Excretion by nephridia . 7. True coelom is present 8. Both unisexual and bisexual . Example - Earthworm , Nereis , Leech etc. Note : There are four pairs of heart in earthworm ( not frue
are four pairs of heart in
heart ) .

2. * All chordates are triploblastic , coelomate and bilaterally symmetrical .
3. A dorsal hollow tubular nerve cord and paired pharyngeal gill slits are other features of chordates . According to classification there are two subphyla in Chordata . ( a ) Protochordates and ( b ) Vertebrata Some main groups of phylum Chordata :
1. Pisces : Main features : Aquatic life ( a ) All are cold blooded animals .

4. Largest zoo in India is Alipur ( Kolkata ) and the largest zoo of the world is Cruiser National Park in South Africa . > Coppersmith Barbet is a bird with well - patterned face of bright colour .

5. Mammalia : Main features ( a ) Sweat glands and oil glands are found on skin . ( b ) These animals are warm blooded . ( c ) Its heart is divided into four chambers ..
Tooth comes twice in these animals . ( Diphyodont ) . There is no nucleus in its red blood cells ( except in camel and lama ) .
( b ) Its heart only pumps impure or deoxygenated blood . ( d ) Heart is made up of two chambers . ( c ) Respiration takes place through gills . Example - Labeo , Scoliodon ( Dog fish ) , Torpedo ( Electric ray ) , Exocoetus ( flying fish ) , Hippocampus ( Sea horse ) etc.
2. Amphibia : Main features : Found both on land & water All these creatures are amphibian . ( b ) All these are cold - blooded ..
( e )
Skin of mammal have hair .
( f )
( g )
External ear ( Pinna ) is present in mammal .
Mammals are divided into three sub - classes :
1. Prototheria - It lays eggs . Example - Echidna
2. Metatheria - It bears immature child . Example- Kangaroo
3. Eutheria - It bears well developed child . Example
( c ) Respiration takes place through gill , skin and lungSapna_kiHuman
Heart has three chambers , two auricles and one ventricle . Example - Frog , Necturus , Toad , Icthyophis , Salamander
> Dolphin is an example of class mammal . Group of Dolphin is called Pod . Note :
1. In mammal the highest body temperature is of goat . ( Average 39 degree celsius ) .
2. Echidna and Duck billed Platypus are the egg laying mammal .
3. Ctenophora a phylum of invertebrate animals are also known as combjellies . s be
étc .
During hibernation frog respire through skin . Note : In fact the croaking of frogs is the call for sex . Salamander has three chambered heart which belong to the Phylum Amphibia .
3. Reptilia : Main features : Crawlling animal ( a ) Land vertebrate , cold - blooded , terrestrial or aquatic vertebrates . ( b ) It contains two pair of limbs . ( c ) The skeleton is completely flexible : ( d ) Respiration takes place through lungs . ( e ) Eggs are covered with shell made up of Calcium carbonate .:
PH Range of human body is between 7.35 to 7.45 . Allantois of mammalian embryo help in respiration .
Excretion in hemichordata takes place by glomerulus .
Smallest man like ape is Orangutam .
Man belong to the family of ' Hominidae ' .
> Orangutan are apes who makes a tool with stick to scrape Insects from a hole in tree or a big log of wood .
Snake , tortoise ,
crocodile ,
Example - Lizard ,
Scientific Names of Common Animals .
sphenodon etc.
Scientific Name
Common Animal
Note : Mesozoic era is called the era of reptiles . Cobra is the only snake which makes nests . Cobra emits their venom through fangs .. Heloderma is the only poisonous lizard .
1 Dog .
2. Cat
Cannis familiar
Felis catus Acinonyx jubatus Pan troglodytes Artlodactyl cervidae Anura ranidae Proboscidea elephantidae Giraffa camelopardalis Capra hircus

3. Cheetah
4. Chimpanzee
Sea snake which is called Hydrophis is the world's most

5. Deer
poisonous snake . ⠀⠀
6 Frog ( True frog ) .
Warm blooded tetrapod
Aves . Main features .
vertebrates with flight adaptation . ( a ) Its fore - feet modified into wings to fly .

7. Elephant

8. Giraffe
( b ) Boat shaped body is divisible into head , neck , trunk
9 Goat
and tail . Join on Telegram @apna_channe

11. Horse 2 Lion 13. Panther 14. Rabbit ja . Tiger 16. Sea horse 17 : Rhinoceros 18 Zebra
Eqqus caballus Panthera leo Panthera pardus Leporidae cuniculas Panthera tigris
Hippocampus syngnathidae . Perrissodanctyl rhinocerotidae Equidae burchell Artiodactyla suidae
There are over 650 skeletal muscles in the human body . The largest muscle of the human body . is . Gluteus Maximus ( muscle of the hip ) . The smallest muscle of the human body is Stapedius . On the basis of weight strongest muscles is found in jaw .. Muscles contain special protein called contractile protein which help in muscle movement .

19. Pig 20. Mouse 21. Kangaroo 122 Lizard 23. Cobra
AAA
Rodentia muridae
Macropus macropodidae
Sauria lacetidae
Naja naja
242 Crow
Corvus splendens Hymenopetrous formicidae Equs asinus Cannis lupus familiaris
Note :

25. Ant
> In vertebrates inside the cell and tissues there is a low concentration of Na * ion and high concentration K of ion . > Ureters , Iris of eye & Bronchi of lung are made up of smooth muscles . > Unstriped muscles are also known as smooth muscles . Arrector pili are the muscles found in skin which make hair on the skin stand up straight when we are cold or frightened . Ciliated epithelium line the inner surface of fallopion tubes , bronchioles and bronchi .
4. Nervous Tissue : This tissue is also called sensory these tissues . This is made up of two specific cells tissue . The nervous systems of the organisms is made up ( a ) Nerve cell or Neurons and ( b ) Neuroglia . Nervous tissue control all the voluntary and involuntary activities of the body .

26. Ass

27. Domestic dog
Note : Honeybees perform waggle dance for others of their kin to indicate the direction and the distance to a source · of their food .

2. Animal Tissue
The animal tissues can be divided into following . categories―
1. Epithelial Tissue
2. Connective Tissue
3. Muscular Tissue
4. Nervous Tissue

1. Epithelial Tissue : Epithelial tissue cover the external aph surface of the body and internal free surface of many organs .. Epithelial cell arranged very close to each other . There are no blood vesseles supplying nourishment to epithelial cells . They receive , nourishment from underlaying connective tissue . The principle functions , of epithelial tissues are covering and lining of free surface . Example : skin , intestine , gland , hollow organ like fallopian tube , nasal passage , bronchioles , trachea etc. The delicate lining of the mouth and oesophagus of a person is madeup of squamous epithelium . ..
2. Connective Tissue : These tissue connect and bind different tissues or organs . It provides the structural frame work and mechanical support to body . It play important role in body as defense tissue , repair , fat storage etc. Example Adipose tissue found beneath the skin . Ligament made up of fibrous connective tissue . Cartilage , bone and blood are connective tissue . > Ligamentis a fibrous tissue which connect bone to bone . Tendon A flexible , inelastic cord of strong fibrous tissue which attach muscles to bone .
3. Muscular Tissue : This is also known as contractile tissue . All the muscles of the body are made up of this tissue .

3. Human Blood
Blood is a type of fluid connective tissue .. The quantity of blood in the human's body is Approximately 7 to 8 % of the total weight of adult . Blood is slightly basic . Its pH range about 7.35 to 7.45 . There is an average of 5-6 litres of blood in human body . Female contains 4 to 5 litre of blood , less in comparison to male . This difference is due to size of body . Spleen act as storage organ for blood . It play an important role in the filtration of blood as part of immune system .
Α΄ Α
Blood is consist of two part ( A ) Plasma and ( B ) Blood corpuscles . ( A ) Plasma : This is the liquid part of blood . 55 % of the blood is plasma . Its 90 % parts is water , 7 % protein ; 0.9 % salt and 0.1 % quantity .
Muscle tissue is of three types- ( a ) Unstriped , ( b ) Striped glucose . Remaining substances are in a very low
Function of plasma : Transportation of digested food , hormones , exeretory product etc from one part of the body to another part . Serum : When Fibrinogen and protein is extracted out of plasma , the remaining plasma is called serum . ( B ) Blood corpuscles : This is the remaining 45 % part of the blood . This is divided into three Type 1 Red Blood Corpuscles ( RBCs )
and ( c ) Cardiac .
( a ) Unstriped : This muscle tissue is found in the walls of those parts which are not controlled by will . These are called involuntary muscle , like - Alimentary canal , Rectum , Ureter , Blood vessels . Unstriped muscles control the motions of all those organs that move on their own . Muscular tissues are responsible for the movement in our body .
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1. Red Blood Corpuscles ( RBC ) : Red Blood Corpuscles ( RBC ) of a mammal is biconcave . RBC is also known as erythrocytes . There is no nucleus . Exception - Camel and Lama . New RBC is formed in Red Bone marrow . ( At the embryonic stage its formation takes place in liver ) . Its life span is from 20 days to 120 days . Its destruction takes place in spleen . Therefore , spleen is called grave of RBC . ➤ It contains haemoglobin , in which haeme is iron containing compound and due to this the colour of blood is red .

1. To control the temperature of the body and to protect the body from diseases .. Normal temperature of the human body is 98.4 ° F ( 37 ° C ) .
2. Clotting of blood is known as Coagulation ..
3. Transportation of O2 , CO₂ , digested food , hormones , excretory material etc.
4. To help in establishing coordination among different body parts . Clotting of Blood : Three important reactions during clotting of blood .
1. Thromboplastin + Prothrombin + Calcium = Thrombin .
2. Thrombin + Fibrinogen = Fibrin .
3. Fibrin + Blood Corpuscles = Clot . The formation of Prothrombin and Fibrinogen of the blood plasma takes place with the help of Vitamin K. The compulsory protein for making clots of blood is Fibrinogen . Their will be no change in the diameter of RBC when it is diluted in normal saline ( an isotonicsolution to blood ) Lymph is a tissue fluid present in intercellular space which resemble to plasma . Blood Group of human : Blood Group was discovered by Landsteiner in 1900. For this , he was awarded with Nobel Prize in the year 1930 . ✗The main reason behind the difference in blood of human is the glycoprotein which is found on the surface of Red Blood Corpuscles called antigen .
Globin is a proteinous compound . With haeme it is extremely capable of combining with oxygen and carbon dioxide . The iron compound found in haemoglobin , is haematin . Normal range of hemoglobin content of an adult man 12 to 16 gm / 100 ml of blood . The main function of RBC is to carry oxygen from the lung to all cells of the body and bring back the carbon dioxide . Anaemia disease is caused due the deficiency of haemoglobin . At the time of sleeping RBC reduced by 5 % and people who are at the height of 4200 meters RBC increases by
A A A A A
30 % in them .
Number of RBC is measured by an instrument called
hemocytometer . In adult man its number range from Sipna_kiraf to 5.5 million per cubic millimeter .
2. White Blood Corpuscles ( WBC ) or Leucocytes : Its shape is similar to Amoeba . Its formation takes place in Bone marrow , lymph node and sometimes in liver and spleen . Its life span is from 13 to 20 days . Normal range is usually between 6,000 to 8,000 per cubic milimeter of blood . > Nucleus is present in the White Blood Corpuscles . Its main function is to protect the body from the disease . The ratio of RBC and WBC is 600 : 1 . About 60 to 65 % part of WBC is made up of neutrophile corpuscles which help in engulfing disease causing micro organism and bacteria . Lymphocytes are type of Leucocytes formed in bone
* Antigen are of two types - Antigen A and Antigen
B. On the basis of presence of Antigen or Glyco Protein , there are four group of blood in human :
That contains Antigen A- Blood Group
A. ( a )
( b )
That contains Antigen B- Blood Group
B. ( c ) That contains both the Antigens A and B - Blood Group
AB .
( d ) That contains neither of the Antigens - Blood Group O. An opposite type of protein , is found in blood plasma . This is called antibody . This is also of two types - Antibody ' a ' and Antibody ' b ' . Therefore , with the four groups of blood division of antibody is as under-
Antibody
Antigen
Blood Group
( In Red Blood Corpuscles ) , Only ' A ' M
( In plasma )
marrow .
Only : ' b
B and T lymphocytes protect the body from disease caused by Pathogen . These are the most important cell type associated with the immunity of body . Lymphocytes produce antibodies against foreign antigen .
3. Blood Platelets or Thrombocytes : It is found only in the blood of human and other mammals .
2 B
Only B ' .
Only a
Both ' A ' and ' B '
Absent
Botha and
Blood Transfusion : Antigen ' A ' and antibody Antigen ' B ' and antibody ' b ' cannot live together . In case of so happened these get most sticky , which spoil the blood . This is called agglutination of blood . Therefore , in blood transfusion adjustment of Antigen and Antibody should be done carefully so that agglutination of blood do not takes place ,
There is no nucleus in it . Its formation takes place in Bone marrow Its life span is from 8 to 9 days . Normal platelet count ranges from 1,50,000 to 4,50,000 per cubic mililiter of blood .
Blood Group . O is called Universal Donor because it does not contain any antigen . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

4. System of the Human Body
. ( a ) Digestive System
Duodenum
The complete process of nutritioin is divided into five stages :
As soon as the food reaches the duodenum bile juice from liver combines with it . Bile juice turns the acidic medium of food into alkaline . Here , pancreatic juice from pancreas combines with food . It contains three types of enzymes ( a ) Trypsin ; It convert the protein and peptone into polypeptides and amino acid . ( b ) Amylase : It converts the starch into soluble sugar . ( c ) Lipase ; It converts the emulsified fats into glycerol and fatty acids . Cholecystokinin is a harmone secreted by endocrine cells of duodenum which induce the release of digestive enzyme from pancreas and bile from gall bladder . It is also known as appetite supressor .

2. Digestion
3. Absorption 5. Defecation
1. Ingestion : Taking the food into mouth is called

1. Ingestion
4. Assimilation
Ingestion .

2. Digestion .: Conversion of nonabsorbable food into absorbable form . The digestion of the food is started from the mouth ..
Mouth ( Buccal Cavity )
Saliva is secreted by salivary gland in mouth in which enzyme amylase or ptyalin is present . Amylase convert starch into simple sugar and make it digestible . Lysozyme present in sliva is antibacterial agent . In human secretion of saliva is approximately 1,5 litre per day . The nature of saliva is slightly acidic pH 5.6 to 7.6 ) .
Jejunum
Here , the process of digestion completed and absorption of digested foods start . Join on Telegram @apna channels

3. Absorption : Digested food get mixed into blood is called absorption . The absorption of digested food takes place through villi found in the wall of small intestinal or ileum .
4. Assimilation : Use of absorbed food in the body is called assimilation .
Large intestine

5. Defecation : Undigested food reaches into large intestine where bacteria turns it into faeces , which is excreted through anus ..
action .
Bile is a yellowish - green coloured alkaline liquid . Its pH value is 7.7 . The quantity of water is 85 % and the quantity of bile pigment is 12 % . The Main functions of bile are as under :
Note :
Enzymes are biocatalysts . Root of tooth is covered by cementum .
* The pouch connected to the junction of small and lagna_kiranile make the pH of the food alkaline and facilitates
Digestion of food is completed in small intestine . Complete digestion of fat takes place in small intestine . Small intestine is longer than the large intestine .
action of pancreatic juice .

2. It kills the harmful bacteria coming with food and neutralize the acidic pH of food coming from stomach .
3. It emulsifies the fats .
4. It accelerates the bowel movement of intestine by which digestive juices in the food mix well . 5. It is helpful in the absorption of vitamin K and other vitamins mixed in fats . In case of obstruction in bile duct , liver cells stop taking bilirubin from blood . As a result , bilirubin spreads throughout the body . This is called jaundice .. Pancreas : This is the second largest gland of the human body . It acts as simultaneously endocrine and exocrine type of gland . Pancreatic juice secretes out of it in which 9.8 % water and the remaining parts contain salt and enzymes . It is alkaline liquid , whose pH value is 7.5 - 8.3 . It contain the enzymes which can digest all the three types of food materials ( like carbohydrates , fat and protein ) , therefore it is called complete digestive juice . Islets of Langerhans : This is a part of the Pancreas . It was discovered by the medical scientist Langerhans . From its ẞ cell - insulin , from a cell - glucagons and from 8 cell - somatostaintin hormones are secreted : Insulin : It is secreted by B - cell of islets of Langerhans . Glucagon is secreted by a - cell and somatostatin harmone is secreted by 8 - cell of islets of langerhans Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Summary of Digestion Enzyme Edible Affer reaction substance
Gland juice Saliva ( 1 ) Amylase Starch Gastric Juice ( i ) Pepsin Protein ( ii ) Rennin Casein Pancreatic ( i ) . Trypsin Protein Juice ***** ( ii ) : Amylase . Starch ( iii ) Lipase Fat Intestinal ( i ) Erepsin Protein Juice ( ii ) Maltase Maltose ( iii ) Lactase Lactose ( iv ) Sucrase Sucrose ( v ) Lipase Fat
Maltose Peptones Calcium paracasein Polypeptides
Sugar Fatty acid and glycero Amino acid Glucose Glucose and fructose Glucose and glactose Fatty acid and glycerol
The main organs participating in.digestion : Liver : This is the largest gland of the human body . Its weight is approximately 1500 gram . Bile is secreted from liver . This bile accelerate the action of enzymes present in the intestine . Liver convert excess of amino acid into ammonia by deamination . These ammonia are further converted into urea by ornithine cycle . Urea comes out from body through kidney .

1. Sinoatrial node ( SA node ) : It is a specialised area of cardiac muscle fibre in right auricle . SA node is also known as pacemaker as it generates each wave of cardiac impulse .
2. Atrioventricular node ( AV node ) : AV node is present close to the interatrial septum . near the right : AV aperture . Wave of contraction is picked up by AV node 4 which spread through , AV bundle . Wave of excitation is picked up by AV node which * spread through AV bundle of muscles fibres present in inter artrial septum as well as inter - ventricular septum . Artificial pacemaker : When SA node becomes defective or damaged , the cardiac impulses do not generate . This can be cured by surgical grafting of an artificial
( b ) Circulatory System
The discovery of blood circulation was done by William Harvey in the year 1628 . There are four parts under it— ( a ) Heart ( b ) Arteries ( c ) Veins ( d ) Blood Heart : It remains safe in the pericardial membrane . Its weight is approximately 300 grams . Heart of the human is made up of four chambers . At the anterior side there is a right atrium and a left atrium . In the posterior side of the heart there is a right ventricle and a left ventricle persist .
➤Between the right atrium and the right ventricle there @apna pacemaker an electric device in the chest of the patient .
is a tricuspid valve ...
ran
It stimulate the heart electrically at regular intervals . Systole and diastole of the heart are collectively called heart beat . In the normal condition the heart of the human beats 72 times / minute and in a single beat it pumps approximately 50 to 80 ml blood . Thebloodpressureofanormalhumanis 120/80 . ( Systolic -120 and Diastolic - 80 ) . These number . represent the blood pressure at ventricular contraction and ventricular relaxation . Blood pressure is measured by sphygmomanometer . > Thyroxin and adrenaline are the hormones which independently controls the heart beat . The CO2 present in the blood accelerates the heart beat by reducing the pH . ✗Presence of air buble in blood stream is dangerous to life , because , it may obstructed the flow of blood . Arteries and vein connected together by capilaries . > Pulse is felt due to rhythmic contraction and relaxation of chamber of heart . ( c ) Lymph Circulatory System The light yellow fluid found in the inter - cellular space between different tissues and cells is called lymph . Lymph is a fluid whose composition is like blood plasma , in which nutrient , oxygen and various other substances are present with WBC . The corpuscles found in lymphare lymphocytes . In fact , these are White Blood Corpuscles ( WBC ) . Lymph flows only in one direction from tissue towards heart in lymph vessels . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Between the left atrium and left ventricle there is a bicuspid valve . The blood vessels carrying the blood from the body towards the heart is called vein .: ➤ In vein there is impure blood i.e. carbon dioxide mixed blood . Its exception is pulmonary vein , which always carry pure blood .
Pulmonary vein carries the blood from lungs to left atrium : It carry pure blood . i.e. , oxygenated blood . The main blood vessels carrying the blood from the heart towards the body is called arota . This is the largest artery found in human . Arteries carry blood from the heart to different part of body . In artery there is pure blood i.e. oxygenated blood . Its only exception is pulmonary artery . Pulmonary artery carries the blood from right ventricle to lungs . It carry impure blood ... Right pulmonary artery is longer than the left . In the right part of the heart , there remains impure blood i.e. carbon dioxide mixed blood and in the left part of the heart there remains pure blood i.e. oxygen
A A
mixed blood .
The artery carrying blood to the muscles of the heart is called coronary arteries . Any type of hindrance in it . causes heart attack .: 14. Course of circulation : Mammals have double circulation . It mean blood have to cross two times from heart before circulating throughout the body .

3. Liver : Liver cells play the main role in excretion by . converting more and more amino acids and ammonia of blood into urea .
4. Lungs The lungs excretes two types of gaseous substances carbon dioxide and water vapour . The excretion of some substances like garlic , onion and some spices in which vapour component is present excreted by the lungs . Different Animals and Excretorv darts Excretory parts
Functions of lymph :

1. The lymphocytes present in lymph helps to prevent the body from diseases by killing the harmful bacteria or other toxic foreign bodies . The node found in lymph vessels are called lymph node works as a filter of microbes in the human body .
3. Lymph helps in healing the wounds .
4. Lymph help in transportation of different material like oxygen , protein and other nutricent to the tissues . At the same time lymph removes metabolic waste and excess of tissue fluid from tissues to the blood stream .
Animal
Unicellular animal By diffusion through general body surface and contractile vacoule Animals of Porifera Phylum By general body surface
( d ) Excretory System .
Excretion : Removal of waste product formed during metabolism , from the body of human is called excretion . Normally excretion means the release of nitrogenous excretory substances like urea , ammonia , uric acid etc. The excretory organs of human are as follows-
1. Kidneys , 2.Skin ,
3. Liver and
4. Lungs .
1. Kidneys : The main excretory organ in human and other mammals is a pair of kidneys . Its weight is 140 grams . There are two parts of it . Outer part is called cortex and the inner part is called medulla . Each kidney is made up of approximately 1,30,00000 kidney ducts which are called nephrons . Nephron is the structural and functional unit of the kidney . There is a cup like structure in the every nephron called Bowman's capsule . Glomerulus is made up of thin blood vessels found in the Bowman's capsule which is made up of two types of arterioles . ( a ) Afferent arteriole : Which carries the blood to the glomerulus .
Directly by cells i By flame cells
Coelenterates
4. Flat worm

5. Animals of Annelida Phylum By nephridia 6. Arthropods
By Malpighian tubules Antennal gland By urinary organ Mainly by kidneys
Curstaceans Mollusca Vertebrate w
Hemodialysis : Process of removal of excess urea from the blood of patient using artificial kidney . ( c ) Nervous System Under this system network of thin thread like nerves are spread throughout the body . After receiving the information of environmental changes from the sensitive organs , it spreads them speedly like electrical impulses and establishes working and coordinating among different organs . Nervous System of human is divided into three parts-
1. Central Nervous System
2. Peripheral Nervous System :
3. Autonomic Nervous System
1. Central Nervous System - Part of the nervous system which keeps control on the whole body and on nervous system itself is called Central Nervous System . The Central Nervous System of human is made up of two parts - Brain and Spinal Cord . Brain is covered by membrane called meninges . It is situated in a bony box called craninum which protect it from external injury . ➤ Input and output nerves meet at central nervous system .
@apna
( b ) : Efferent arteriole : By which the blood is taken out of the glomerulus . The process of filtration of liquid into the cavity of Bowman's capsule , is called ultra filtration . ⠀ The main function of the kidneys is purification of blood plasma i.e. to excrete the unwanted nitrogenous waste substances through urination . The supply of blood to the kidneys takes place in large quantity in comparison to other organs . In the kidneys average 125 ml per minute blood is filtrated i.e. 180 litres per day . Out of it 1.45 litres urine is formed daily and the remaining is absorbed back by the cells of nephron and mix into the blood . Urine is an aqueous solution in which 95 % is water . Other constituents are urea , uric acid , chloride , sodium , potassium , creatinine , organic and inorganic compound .
I. Brain
Mid brain
Hind brain
Fore brain
_ Corpora quadrigemina
Cerebrum Thalamus Hypothalamus
The colour of the urine is light yellow due to the presence of urochromes in it . Urochrome is formed by the dissociation of haemoglobin . The correct sequence of organs that occur in the path of urine flow in human body is Kidney Ureter Urinary bladder Urethra Urine is acidic . Its pH value is 6 ... The stone formed in the kidneys is made up of calcium oxalate .
2. Skin : Oil gland and sweat glands found in the skin respectively secretes sebum and sweat .
Cerebellum ons Medul ( A ) Fore Brain : The weight of the brain of the human is 1336 grams . ( i ) The function of the Cerebrum : This is the most developed part of the brain . This is the centre of wisdom , memory , will power , movements , knowledge and thinking . The analysis and coordination of muscular movement received from sense organs . It is the largest part of brain ( ii ) The function of thalamus : It is the centre of feeling pain , cold and heat . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

4. It increases the heart beat .:

5. It increases the secretion of sweat glands . 6. It stretches the pupil of eye ball . " 7. It relax the muscles of urinary bladder . 8. It reduces the speed of contraction & relaxation of intestine .
( B ) Mid brain

9. The rate of respiration increase . 10. It increases the blood pressure . 11. It increases the sugar level in the blood . 12. It increases the number of Red Blood Corpuscles in the * blood . 13. It helps in clotting of blood . 14. Collective impact of this affects fear , pain and anger . Functions of Parasympathetic Nervous System : The functions of this system is normally the opposite of Sympathetic Nervous System . For example : .1 . It widens the lumen of blood vessels except the coronary blood vessels .
2. It increases the secretion of saliva and other digestive juices .
3. The contraction of pupil is caused by this .
4. It creates contraction in the muscles of the urinary bladder . 5. It creates contraction and motion in intestinal walls . 6. The effect of this nervous system collectively creates . the occasion of rest and joy .
The function of Corpora quadrigemina : This is the centre of control on vision and hearing power .
: ( C ) Hind Brain
☐ ( 1 ) Function of cerebellum : It is situated at the back of head and consist of two cerebellar hemisphere like cerebrum . It is ( Voluntary ) centre for coordination of muscular body movements and maintenance of posture keeping body in balance . It is second largest part of brain . ( ii ) Pons : It act as bridge carrying ascending and descending tracts between brain and spinal cord .. ( iii ) Medulla : It is posterior most part of brain and continuous into the spinal cord . It connect and communicate the brain with spinal cord . It contain the cardiac respiratory and vasomotor centre that control complex activity like ¡ heart action , respiration , coughing , sneezing etc. The brain of the human is situated in the cranium which protects it from external injury . Brain is covered by membrane called meninges .. Note : EEG ( Electroencephalography ) is done to know the function of brain . Spinal cord : The posterior region of the medulla oblongata forms the spinal cord . Its main functions are ap ( a ) Coordination and control of reflex actions i.e. it works as the centre of the reflex actions ... ( b ) It carries the impulses coming out of brain . Note : Reflex action was first discovered by the scientist , Marshall Hall .
( f ) Skeletal System
The skeletal system of human is made up of two parts Axial skeleton ( b ) Appendicular skeleton ( a ) Axial skeleton : The skeleton , which makes the main axis of the body is called axial skeleton . Skull , vertebral column and bones of chest comes under it . There are 80 bones in axial skeleton . ( i ) Skull : There are 22 bones in it . Out of these , 8 bones jointly protect the brain of the human known as carnium . The structure made up of these bones is called forehead . All the bones of the forehead remain joined strongly by the sutures . There are 14 bones in addition to this which form the face . Ear ossicles have six bone and hyoid is made up of one bone . ☐ ( ii ) Vertebral Column : The vertebral column of the human is made up of 33 vertebra . All the vertebra are joined together by intervertebral disc . Vertebra is made flexible by intervertebral disc . We divide the whole vertebral column into the following parts— > The first vertebra is called atlas which holds the skull .. Cervical region 7 vertebras
" ki The
This is an involuntary action taken by spinal cord . Reflex action takes place in a sequance through neural pathways in nervous system called reflex arcs . The correct sequance of reflex arc- Receptor Sensory Neuron → Relay Neuron in spinal cord Motor Neuron Effector Organ .

2. Peripheral Nervous System : Peripheral Nervous System is made up of the nerves arising from brain and . spinal cord . These are called cranial and spinal nerves respectively . There are sensory , motor and mixed nerve ...
> There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves and 31 pairs of spinal nerve found in a human . The unit of nervous tissues is called Neuron or nerve cell .
3. Autonomic Nervous System : Autonomic Nervous System is made up of some brain nerves and some spinal cord nerves . It supplies nerves to all the internal organs and blood vessel of the body . Langley , first presented the concept of Autonomic Nervous System in the year 1921 . There are two parts of Autonomic Nervous System : ( a ) Sympathetic Nervous System ( b ) Parasympathetic Nervous System Functions of Sympathetic Nervous System ☐
1. It narrows the blood vessels in the skin .
2. By its action hair gets erected .
3. It reduces the secretion of salivary glands .
2 .
Thoracic region 12 vertebras
Lumber region
5 vertebras
Sacral region
( 1 ) 5 vertebras ( fused together ) ( 1 ) 4 vertebras ( fused together )
Caudal region
5 .
Total
Functions of vertebral column :
1. Holds the head .
2. It provides the base to the neck and body .
3. It helps the human in standing , walking etc. It provides flexibility to the neck and body by which a human can move neck and body in any direction . Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. It provides protection to spinal cord .
( g ) Endocrine System
( b ) Appendicular skeleton :: The following are the parts of it- ( i ) Foot bones- Both hands and feet have 60 bones . Each limb is consist of 30 bones . ( ii ) To hold the forelimb and hind limb on the axial skeleton in human there are two girdles . The girdle of forelimb is called pectoral girdle and girdle of hindlimb is called pelvic girdle . · Pectoral girdle joined with forelimb is called humerus and the bone from pelvic girdle join to hindlimb is called femur . Functions of the skeletal system :
1. To provide a definite shape to the body .
2. To provide protection to soft parts of the body
3. To provide a base to the muscles for joining .
4. To help in respiration and nutrition .: 5. To form Blood Corpuscles .
( a ) Exocrine glands : Gland which have duct are called exocrine gland . Secretion of enzymes pass through it . Example - Digestive gland , Sweat gland , Mucous gland , Salivary gland etc. ( b ) Endocrine gland : These are ductless gland . Hormones are secreted by these gland . Hormones are sent . to the different parts of the body through blood plasma . Example - Pituitary gland , Thyroid gland , Parathyroid gland etc. Functions and effect of the main endocrine system of the human body and hormone secreted by them-
1. Pituitary gland : It is situated at the base of brain in a depression of sphenoid bone of the fore head . This is called sella- turcica . Pituitary gland attached to hypothalamus by a stalk . Its weight is approximately 0.6 grams : > Pituitary gland is also known as master gland . its secretion is controlled by hypothalamus . The functions of the hormones secreted by Pituitary gland :
1. STH Hormone ( Somatotropic hormone ) : It controls the growth of the body especially the growth of bones . By the excessiveness of STH cause gigantism and acromegaly in which height of the human grows abnormally . Lack of STH causes dwarfism in human .
2. TSH Hormone ( Thyroid Stimulating Hormone ) It stimulates the thyroid gland to secrete hormone .
3. ACTH Hormone ( Adrenocorticotropic Hormone ) : It controls the secretion of adrenal cortex . Femur ( bone of this apna kiA , GH Hormone ( Growth Hormone ) : It controls the
The total number of bones in a human's body - 206 to 208 The total number of bones during childhood – 270 ... The total number of bones of head . ( forehead - 8 , facial - 14 , ear - 6 , hyoid - 1 )
-.29
The total number of bones in vertebral column , initially - 33 After development -26 ( 5 sacral fuse into 1 and 4 caudal fuse into 1 ) ** The total number of bones of ribs 24 The longest and strongest bone of the body . .
The smallest bone of the body . Stapes ( bone of ear ) ➤ Foramen Magnum is an aperture found in the skull . The name and number of bones of some specific regions- Ear bones
functions of gonads . This is of two types : ( a ) FSH Hormone ( Follicle - Stimulating Hormone ) In male it stimulates spermatogenesis in the seminiferous tubules of the testis . In female , it stimulates the Graafian follicles of the ovary to secret the hormone Oestrogen . ( b ) LH Hormone ( Luteiniging Hormone ) : Interstitial cell stimulating hormone , secretion of testosterone hormone takes place in male and in case of female estrogen hormone secreted .. 5. LTH Hormone ( Lactogenic Hormone ) : Its main function is to stimulate secretion of milk in breasts for infants .
Maleus
Incus
Stapes
( 2 )
Bone of hand
Humerus
Upper arm
( 1 )
Radius & ulna
( 2 )
Forearm
Wrist bone ..
Carpals
Palm bone
Metacarpals
( 5 )
Phalanges
( 14 )
Finger
Bone of Foot Thigh bone

6. ADH Hormone ( Antidiuretic Hormone ) : It causes increase in blood pressure . It is helpful in maintaining the water balance in the body and reduce the volume of urine . ➤ Hypothalamus is the part of brain which control emotional reaction in ourbody : " > Hypothalamus is located at the base of brain near pituitary gland , releasing hormone Which regulate the synthesis and secretion of pituitary hormones . Hormone secreted from hypothalamus regulate the body temperature . The hormones serotonin is known to be helpful in coping with stress . It is secreted by neuron located in
( 1 )
Femur
Tibiafibula
( 2 )
Hind limb
Tarsal
{ 7 )
Ankle bone
( 5 )
Sole
Metatarsal
( 14 )
Phalanges Patella
Digits
( 1 )
Knee
Total 391
Cartilage is the part of skeleton which is not hard as bone and can be bent Ex - tip of nose . External ear of man is mainly made up of Cartilage . Note :
1. The muscles and bones are join together by tendon .
2. The muscle which join bone to bone is called ligaments . Tendon and ligament are example of dense regular .
midline of brainstem .

2. Thyroid gland : This is situated below the larynx on both side of respiratory trachea in throat of human . ✓ The hormones secreted by it are Thyroxine and Join on Telegram @apna channels
tussue ...
Ligaments of human body are mad up of yellow fibre

2. It is necessary for the normal growth of the body particularly for the development of bones , hair etc.
3. The normal functions of reproductive organs depend on the activeness of thyroid gland .
4. It control the water balance of the body in coordination with the hormones of pituitary gland . 5. Thyroxine control the metabolic rate of body . Diseases Caused by the Deficiency of Thyroxin :
1. Cretinism : This disease affects the children . The mental and physical retardness of the child :
2. Myxedema : This disease is normally found in youth the metabolism does not take place properly which causes reduction in heart beat and blood pressure .
3. Hypothyroidism : This disease is caused due to chronic deficiency of thyroxin hormone . Due to this disease normal reproduction is not possible . Sometimes due to its deficiency , human becomes dumb and deaf .
4. Goitre : This disease is caused by the deficiency of iodine in food . In this disease the shape of the thyroid gland enlarge abnormally . Iodization of salt in a public health measure is to prevent goitre . Diseases caused by the Excessiveness of Thyroxin : Exothalmic Goitre : In this disease eyes get bulging out of the eye socket with increased metabolic rate .

5. Gonads :
( i ) Ovary : The following hormones are secreted by this : ( a ) Estrogen : Itcompletes the development of reproductive organs . " ( b ) Progesterone It stimulates the thickening of uterus lining during ovarien cycle .
( c ) Relaxin During pregnancy it is found in uterus and placenta . This hormone smoothens the pubic symphysis and it widens the uterine cervix so that a child is delivered easily .
Oxytocin is a harmone which help in contraction of uterine wall during child birth and play an important role in release of milk from mammary gland , secreted by hypothalamus produced and released by the posterior pituitary . ( ii ) Testis : The hormone secreted by it is called testosterone . It motivates the sexual behaviour and growth of secondary sexual characters .
@apna

3. Parathyroid gland : This is situated in the right back of the thyroid gland of the throat . Two hormones are secreted by it : ( a ) Parathyroid hormone : This hormone is secreted when there is a deficiency of calcium in the blood . It regulate the level of calcium in blood .
Sertoli cells are found in testis ..
The mechanism of action of oral contraceptive pills is to inhibit the relase of egg ..
. :
( b ) Calcitonin : This hormonė is released when there is excess of calcium in the blood is present . Hence , hormone secreted by parathyroid gland controls the quantity of calcium in blood .
4. Adrenal gland : There are two parts of this gland ( a ) outer part is cortex and ( b ) inner part is medulla . Hormones secreted by cortex and their function- ( i ) Glucocorticoids : This controls the metabolism of carbohydrate , protein and fat .
Note :
1. Primary function of eccrine glands is to produce
sweat ..
Way of

2. Sweating or perspiration is nature's lowering the internal temperature of the body .
3. Sweat glands are present in skin .
4. When exposed to sunlight our skin get darker due to presence of melanin .
; ☑
( h ) Respiratory System
The most important organ of the respiratory system of human is lungs where the exchange of gases takes place . All those organs comes under respiratory system which help in exchange of gases are - Nasal passage , Pharynx , Larynx or Voice box , Trachea , Bronchi , Bronchioles and Lungs . Nasal passage : Its main function is related to sniffing . Its inner cavity is lined with mucous membrane . This secretes approximately ½ litre of mucous everyday . This prevents the particles of dust , bacteria or other small micro organisms from entering into the body . It makes the air wet entering into the body and equalises it with the temperature of the body . Pharyny : It is situated behind the nasal cavity a common passage for both respiratory and digestive system . Join on Telegram @apna channels
( ii ) Mineralocorticoids : Its main function is reabsorp- tion of ion by kidney ducts and to control the quantity of other ion in the body .
Note :
1. Cortex is essential for life . If this is extracted completely from the body , human will remain alive only for a week or two .
2. In case of deformation of cortex , the process of metabolism gets disturbed ; this disease is called Addison's disease . Hormones secreted by Medulla and their function : ( a ) Adrenaline ( Epinephrine ) - This is an amino acid . ( b ) Nor - adrenalinor ( Nor epinephrine ) - This is also an amino acid . Both the hormones are secreted in response to stress .

5. Nutrients :
To maintain the life organisms performs some basic function is called nutrition . Nutrition is one of the basi function of life in which intake of food , digestion , absorption , assimilation and egestion of undigested foods are included . Nutrient Nutrient are the substance by which an organism get energy or it is used for biosynthesis of body . For example carbohydrate and fat are the source of energy . Whereas proteins and minerals are the nutrient used . for biosynthesis .
1. Carbohydrate : Carbohydrates are organic.com- pounds in which the ratio of Carbon , Hydrogen and Oxygen : Is 1:21 . Carbohydrate in the form of sugar and starch are major intake in animals and human . 50 to 75 % energy is obtained by oxidation of carbohydrate . Carbohydrate containing aldehyde group is called aldose and with ketone " group is called ketose . Carbohydrates are derivatives of polyhydroxy alcohols . Classification of carbohydrate : Carbohydrates are classified into three main group . ( a ) Monosaccharides : These are the simple sugar made up of single polyhydroxy or ketone unit . Most abundant monosaccharides found in nature is glucose containing six carbon atom . Triose , tetrose , pentoses , heptoses are the type of monosaccharides . Glucose is a type of hexose sugar . > The sweetest sugar is fructose .
There is no need of oxygen in glycolysis . Hence , this process is similar in both anaerobic and aerobic réspiration . In this process four atom of hydrogen formed which is used in converting NAD to 2NADH2 . The enzyme which take part in glycolysis during respiration are found in cell cytoplasm .
2. Kreb's Cycle : It was described by Hens Krebs in 1937 . This is also called Citric Acid Cycle or Tricarboxylic Cycle ( TCA cycle ) . This process is completed inside the Mitochondria in presence of specific enzymes .. Breakdown of pyruvate into CO2 , H2O and energy takes place in mitochondria .. Two molecule of each ADP and ATP are formed . In this cycle 4 pair of hydrogen atom are released . In complete cycle two molecule of pyruvic acid produce 12 molecule of carbondioxide ....
( b ) Oligosaccharides : When 2 to 10 monosaccharides In our system maximum number of ATP molecule are @ajoin together they form oligosaccharides . They are usually formed during Kreb's Cycle . , crystalline in nature and sweet in test . Maltose , sucrose , lactose are disaccharides made up of two monosaccharides . Production of energy : By the oxidation of pyruvic acid one molecule of ATP , five molecule of NADH and one molecule of NADH , are formed . From one molecule of NADH three molecule of ATP and from one molecule of NADH2 two molecule of ATP are obtained . Hence , from one molecule of pyruvic acid 1 + ( 3 × 5 ) + ( 2 × 1 ) = 18 molecule of ATP are formed . From one molecule of glucose , two . molecule of pyruvic acid are formed , by which 36 molecule of ATP are released . During the glycolysis , two molecule of ATP are obtained . Hence , during oxidation of one molecule . of glucose total 2 + 36 = 38 ATP molecule are obtained . Respiratory substances : Carbohydrate , fat and protein are the main respiratory substances . At first , oxidation of glucose takes place , then fat . After the consumption of carbohydrate and fat oxidation of protein start if energy is required . Note : Respiration is a Catabolic Process . It also reduces the weight of the body . Respiration is controlled by medulla oblongeta . Cyanide poisoning causes death in second due to breaking down the electron transport chain system . Eustachian tube help in equalising the pressure on either side of ear - drum . Retina of eye process the information gathered by photoreceptor cells and send it to the brain to decide what the picture is . The part of eye which is responsible for the conversion of image of an object into neural signal is optic
เท ล
( c ) Polysaccharides : These are the compound of sugar which are formed due to joining large number of mono- saccharide . These are insoluble and tasteless . Some example of polysaccharides are starch , glycogen , cellulose , chitin etc. Function of Carbohydrate Carbohydrate is used as fuel . During the process of respiration , glucose break into CO , and HO with the release of energy . One gram of glucose gives 4.2 kilo calories energy . Glucose is the source of immediate energy production in the cell Nucleic acids are polymers of nucleosides and nucleotides containing pentose sugar . Lactose of milk is formed from glucose and glactose . Glucose is used for the formation of fat and amino acid . Carbon skeleton of monosaccharides is used in the formation of fatty acid , chitin , cellulose etc. Source of Carbohydrate : Wheat , rice , maize , sweet potato , potato and other plant and animals are the sources of carbohydrate .
2. Protein : Protein word was first used by J. Berzelius . This is a complex organic compound made up of 20 type of amino acids . Approximately 16 % of the human body is made up of protein . Nitrogen is present in protein in addition to C , H & O .. Nitrogen is essential for protein synthesis . Twenty types of amino acid are necessary for human body , out of which 12 are synthesized by body itself and remaining 8 are obtained by food are called essential amino Join on Telegram @apna_channels
nerve .

3. Fats : Fat is an ester of glycerol and fatty Infact carbon , hydrogen and oxygen are present in different quantities , but proportionally less oxygen carbohydrate .
acid :
Than
* 1 . Simple Protein : It consists of only amino acid . Example - Albumins , Globulins , Histones etc.
2. Conjugated Protein : Having some another chemical compounds in addition to amino acid . Example - Chromo protein , Glyco protein etc.
3. Derived Protein : It is derived from the partial digestion of natural protein or its hydrolysis . Example - Peptone , Peptide , Proteinase etc. Animal protein is called first class protein because it ☐ contain all the essential amino acid . Egg contains all
Normally fat remains as solid at 20 ° C temperature , b if it is in liquid form at this temperature , this is called oil . Fatty acids are of two types - Saturated and unsaturated . Unsaturated fatty acids are found in fish oil and vegetabl oil . Only coconut oil and palm oil are the examples of saturated oil . 9.3 kilo calorie energy is liberated from 1 gram fat . Normally an adult person should get 20-30 % of energy from fat . Fat store maximum energy per gram .
Main functions of fat :
Function of Protein :
It takes part in the formation of cells , protoplasm and
It provides energy to the body .
It remains under the skin and prevents the loss of heat from the body .
tissues .
These are important for physical growth . Physical growth hampers by its deficiency . Lack of proteins causes Kwashiorkorand Marasmusdiseases in children . ✓ In case of necessity protein provide energy to the body . ➤ It control the development of genetic characters . > Helpful in conduction also . Kwashiorkor In this disease hands and legs of children get slimmed and the stomach comes out , caused by deficiency of protein diet . Marasmus : In this disease muscles of children are loosened caused by protein deficiency .
It make the food material testy .
It protects different parts of the body from Injury . Due to the lack of fat skin get dried , weight of the body decreases and development of the body checked .
> Due to the excessiveness of fat the body gets fatty , heart disease takes place and blood pressure increases . Rancidity is defined as oxidation of fat and oils that change the taste and smell of food .
4. Vitamins : Vitamin was invented by Sir F. G. Hopkins . The term vitamin was coined by Funk :
Note :
Biological catalysts are protein molecule known as enzyme which speed up a chemical reaction remain unchanged after reaction optimaly function at 37 ° C . Human nails are made up of protein keratin . Soyabeans is the richest source of protein . Keratin is the protein which protects the epithelial cells from damage . " When egg is heated the transparent liquid portion around yolk turns solid and turbid white . this happen due to thermal denaturation of protein .
apna_kiran
Vitamins are organic compound required in minute quantities . No calorie is obtained from it , but it is very important in regulating chemical reactions in metabolism of the body . On the basis of solubility , vitamins are of two types : ( a ) Vitamin soluble in water : Vitamin - B and Vitamin
C. ( b ) Vitaminsolublein fat : Vitamin - A , Vitamin - D , Vitamin - E and Vitamin - K . The diseases caused by the deficiency of vitamins and their sources
A A
Chemical name . Chemical name Retinol
Deficiency diseases Colour blindness , Xerophthalmia , Night blindness
Vitamin Vitamin - A
Sourcea
Milk , Egg , Cheese , Green vegetable , cod liver oil , Carrot
Vitamin - B Thiamine
Beriberi
Ground nut , Rapseed , Dried Chilli , Pulses , Liver , Egg Veget Yeast etc.
Meat , Milk , Nut , Tomato , Sugarcane , wheat germ etc Cracking of skin , redish eye , cracking Meat , Green vegetables , Milk , yeast , cheese etc. at the corners of lips , mouth ulcers . Whitening of hair , mentally retardness Dermatitis , Pellagra . Insomania , burning felt , irritability . Meat , Sweet Potato , Tomato , nut , Leafy vegetables , corns , 60 Anaemia , skin disease , Depression . Liver , Meat , Grains , Rice bran , wheat germ , yeast , Paralysis , body pain , hair falling , caly Meat , Egg , Liver , Milk , nuts , whole grain etc. and itchy shin .
Riboflavin
Vitamin - B
Nicotinamide or Niacin Pantothenic acid Pyridoxine Biotin
Vitamin - B
Vitamin - B
min - B
Vitamin - B
Vitamin - B .
Anaemia , dysentry
Pulse , Liver , Egg Meat , Milk , eggs etc ..
Folic acid
Vitamin - B
Cynocobalamin Pernicious Anaemia , jaundice ,
Vitamin - B
Teroile Glutemic , Ankle edema
or :
Cobalamin
Vitamin - B Vitamin - C
Folic acid
Pulses , Liver , Vegetables , Eggs yeast , bonana etc.
Anaemia , diarrhoea
Ascorbic acid Scurvy , Swelling of gums or bleed ng Lemon , Orange , Tomato , Sour substances , Chilly Sprouted g Join on Telegram @apna_channels

40.g
30 g
508
20 g
50 g
40g
100 g
40 g
Vegetables ( other )
60 g
80g
70 g
2508
2508
250g
200 g
300 g
150 g
150 g
100 g .
2008
250 g
Milk
30 g
10g
308
20g
60 g
.608
50 g
50 %
50 g
Tuber root
80 g
45 g
.308
40 g
45 g
40g .
20 g
35 g .
208
30g
Sugar
25 g

40.g
15 g
25g
40 g
40g 45g 65 g 20g Bt - Brinjal is a genetically modified vegetable recently being made available in Indian market . Necessary calorie for a human being :
Fat and oil
> Restrication enzyme belong to larger class of enzyme
called nucleases .
Exonuclease remove nucleotide from the end of DNA . Endonuclease cut at specific position within the DNA . Plant , bacteria , fungi and animals whose gene have been altered by manipulation are called Genetically modified organisms ( GMO ) . ➤ Gene therapy is a collection of method that allow correction of a gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child or embryo . > The first clinical gene therapy was given in 1990 to a four year girl with adenosine deaminase ( ADA ) deficiency . > Genetically modified plants are useful in increasing crop yields , reduce the losses and make the crop more tolerant to stresses .
> ➤

5. Nature of work
Male
Female
2000 calorie
2100 calorie
Light worker
2500 calorie
3000 calorie

2. Eight hours worker
3600 calorie
3000 calorie
3 Hard worker
Sodium Benzoate is used as preservative to preserve food item . Milk is not considered as complete food due to lack of vitamin C and iron .

6. Biotechnology & Applied Biology Biotechnology : It deal with techniques of using live organisms or enzymes from organisms to produce product and processes which are useful for humans . Ex - making curd , bread or wine in which microbes are used .
> >
Papaver somniferum plant yields powerful analgesic . Major source of sugar in the world is Saccharum Officinarum .
Cocos nucifera a plant material , which is widely used in the preparation of culture medium . > To yield milk , cow is given prolactin . > The best way to determine paternity is DNA finger printing .
lena_kin
Genetic Engineering : This is the techniques to alter the chemistry of genetic material ( DNA & RNA ) and introduce into host organism , which change the phenotype of the host organism .. Bioprocess Engineering : Maintenance of sterile ambience to enable growth of only desired microbes or eukaryotic cells in large quantities for the manufacture of biotechnological products like antibiotics , vaccines , enzymes etc. Restriction enzyme : This is known as molecular scissors cutting the DNA at specific location . Plasmid : In addition to genomic DNA many bacteria have extra small circular DNA known as plasmid . Due to presence of plasmid bacteria is resistance to many antibiotic . This create an unique character in bacteria . A plasmid can be used as vector to deliver an alien piece of DNA into host organism .. DNA ligase This is an enzyme by which cut end of DNA molecule join together . Recombinant DNA : This is a DNA which has been created by combining two fragments of DNA from two different source . Cloning : Producing large number of identical copy of any template , DNA is called cloning .
Chloromycetin is obtain from streptomycetin venezualae . Genetic engineering is applied in the development “ Recombinant Vector Vaccines " in which bacteria and virus are used as vectors .
> Bollgard I and Bollgard II technology are used in developing genetically modified crop plant . > The term ' ACE - 2 ' is talked about in the context of spread of viral diseases : > A diagnostic test , Real Time PCR for COVID - 19 detects RNA of virus . > Rapid Antibodies Test does not require sample from nose and throat in covid - 19 test approved by Indian council of Medical Research . Vector vaccines work to provide immunity by entering directly into the cells and enabling them to create spike protein . Sinovac given for Covid - 19 is a whole virus vaccine DNA Barcoding can be a tool to distinguish among species that look alike . The serum Institute of India produced Covid - 19 Vaccine name covishield using m RNA plateform Sputnik V vaccine is manufactured by using vector base food , wasyon on Telegram @apna_channels
Application of biotechnology include agriculture , therapeutic , diagnostic , biopharmaceutical , processed . treatment and
Join

1. Malaria RBC & Plasmodium
Wounds in urinogenial tract Red eyes , Pain in eye
Syphilis
Liver
pallidum ,
Bleeding from gums
Entamoeba gingivelis

2. Pyorrhoea Gums
Trachoma Eye
Chlamydia
☐ trachomatis

3. Sleeping Brain Trypanosoma Tse - Tse flies Fever with
Note : In the year 1882 , German scientist Robert Koch discovered the bacteria of Cholera and T.B. Tuberculosis is also known as white plague . > Birds flu is a disease that affects human beings and spread through poultry . -
sickness
severe sleep

4. Diarrhoea Intestine Entamoeba .
Mucous & Diarrohea with blood
histolytica
Sand flies High fever

5. Kala - ajar Bone Leismania
marrow donovani
If waste material contaminate the source of drinking water , the most probability to spread the disease is Typhoid . An important cause of tooth decay by the bacterium streptococcus mutans is because of their ability to attached to teeth surface by producing slime layer from
Malignant malaria is pernicious malaria , caused by plasmodium falciparum . Charles Leveran discovered the Malaria Parasite , plasmodium in the blood of the affected person in the year 1880 . Ronald Ross ( 1897 ) confirmed the Malaria is caused by malaria parasite and told that mosquito is the carrier of it .
sugar .
Anthrax disease is caused by bacteria . Vaccine : It is a biological preparation of weakened
Organism that transmits disease from one individual apna kor killed pathogen which provides active acquired
A A A A L
another is called vector :
Female culex mosquito is the vector of filariasis . Quinine is the effective medicine used in the treatment of malaria obtain from the bark of cinchona tree . » Diseases caused by Bacteria :
immunity to the body for a particular disease . Vaccination : Administration of vaccine to stimulate an individual's immune system to develop immunity to a pathogen , producing antibodies .
Disease
Affected
Name of
Symptoms
Name of disease .
Vaccine
Bacteria
organ
Diptheria , Pertussis , Tetanus given to child up to one year . Bacillus , Calmette - Guerin , It provide immunization against tuberculosis given to the child up to one to four . month Oral polio vaccine is given to the child from ( Polio ) · 2 month to 6 year . ☑The type of vaccine protect againt Diptheria is Toxoid . Louis Pasteur discovered the vaccine of Rabies and pasteurization of milk .
DFT
Clostridium Tetani High fever , spasm
Tetanus Nervous system
in body , Closing of jaws etc
BCG
Intestine
Cholera
Vibrio cholerae
Continuous stool
and vomiting
OPV
Salmonella typhia Highfever , headache
Intestine Tuberculosis Lungs
Typhoid
„ Mycobacterium
Repeated coughing ,
tuberculosis
loss of weight :
AAA
Diphtheria Respiratory Corynebacterium Difficulty in
tube
diphtheriae
respiration and suffocation
> Rotavirus vaccine is used to prevent diarrhoea . In 1974 the immunization programme introduce in • India as ' Expanded Programme of Immunization ( EPI ) , by ministry of Health and Family welfare .
Lungs , and Pasteurella pesties Very high fever , lymph nodi
Plague
muscle tiredness , stomach pain .
aches ,
Diseases caused by Viruses
( S
Disease
Affected organ
Name of virus
Symptoms
Defensive system of HIV ( Human Immuno - Immune system of body become weak body like lymphocytes deficiency Virus ) fever Whole body , Number Large no . of Dengue vi - High fever , Headaches , joint and muscle pain . also known as of platletes in blood rus transmitted by the Vomiting and rashes . Sometime it causes bleeding Break bone fever decreases bite of Aedes mosquito from noses , gums .
AIDS / HIV
Dengue
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

10. Meningitis
Brain and spinal cord Virus

11. Herpes
Skin
Herpes Simplex Virus Contagious sores , most often around the mouth ( HSV ) .

12. Mumps
Salivary gland
Viral infection
Swollen , painful salivary glands , fever , headache fatigue and appetite loss Fever , cough , tiredness , loss of taste or smell diarrhoea , headache sore throat :

13. COVID - 19
Respiratory
system SARS - COV - Z virus
later on any part of the body
Note : AIDS - Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome . Elisa Test : Test of HIV Virus ( AIDS ) > The transmission of HIV infection generally occurs through transfusion of contaminated blood , HIV infect helper lymphocytes which makes the immun system of body weak .
Covishield , the Covid vaccine of India approved by WHO , is manufactured by Serum Institute , Pune . ➤ Sulphur drug is antibacterial .
Common cold is sometime caused by Adenovirus where as AIDS is caused by retrovirus .
@apno Medical Instrument
The disease which has been eradicated is small pox . NH , virus is related with the disease swine flue . Dengue feveris transmitted by the vector Aedes aegypte , mosquito - borne virus which betong to Adenovirus . Zika disease is caused by a virus transmitted by day time active Aedes mosquito . > Epidemic diseases are infectious disease affecting many person at the same time and spread from person to person . Ex - Cholera , Corona , Influenza etc. The disease Rubella is caused by virus . National Viral Hepatitis Control Program ( NVHCP ) aim to achieve country wide elimination of Hepatitis ' C ' by 2030 . According to WHO , the official name of the virus responsible for Covid - 19 disease - SARS - Cov - 2 . Researchers has discovered recently antibody of Nipah * Virus in bats from Mahabalaswar cave . Probiotics help to provide the healthy digestion .
➤ Pacemaker : It is a small device that is placed in the chest . to control abnormal heart beat . > Computed Tomography Scan ( CT Scan ) : Used to investigate abnormal functioning of the body . > Electrocardiograph ( ECG ) : To find out the abnormality of heart . N.
Use to detect
✓ Electroencephalogram ( EEG ) malfunctioning of brain .
Rhinoscope is an instrument for examining the nose , Ultrasonic waves are used to know the growth of fetus in the womb . Concave mirror is used by dentist to see the image of teeth of a patient . : Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) : Use to find out any abnormality in the whole body . Auto analyser Use to examine glucose , urea and
cholestrole .
eneficial bacteria for
A. Diseases caused by Protozoa :
Mission COVID Suraksha is to accelerate development of covid vaccine . India's vaccine diplomacy in which Covid - 19 vaccine made in India was supplied to other countries - called Vaccine Maitri . Giving access to consumption of sugar as source of energy in diet , for the poorest of the poor sections , of society has been initiated under Antyodaya Anna Yojana .
Amoebiasis Amoebic Dysentery → This disease is caused by the protozoan parasite entamoba histolytica . It is transmitted through contaminated food or water . It can lead to severe dirrohea , abdominal pain and liver ascesses
B. Diseases caused by helminthes : Filaria : This disease is caused by Wuchereria bancroft This worm is transmitted by the stings of culex mosquito This disease causes swelling in legs , testes and other parts of the body This disease in as Elepharitiasis Join on Telegram @apha channels

14. Migrain : An allergic disease in which there is a periodic attack of headache takes place . It is an incurable disease . 15.Obesity : Excessive fatness is called obesitymeasured by basal metabolic index ( BMI ) . 15. Piles : There are various vein in the rectum . Due to extra pressure on vein it prevent the free flow of blood . creating problem . It is caused due to constipation . 17. Rheumatism : The symptom of this disease is fever with joints pain . _ 18. Atherosclerosis : Deposition of cholesterol in the lumen of arteries which prevent the flow of blood is called atherosclerosis . 19. Arteriosclerosis : Due to deposition of cholesterol and calcium salt arteries became stiff and rigid . It loses the property of elasticity due to which wall of arteries may rapture . 20. Uremia : Presence of excess of urea in blood is called : uremia . This is caused by malfunctioning of kidney . 21. Glycosuria : Presence of excess of glucose in urine is known as glycosuria . 22 : Arthritis : It is disease in which inflammation of joints takes place . 23. Osteoporosis : It is a age dependent disorder of bone in which low bone mass and increased fragility takes place . 24. Hyperglycemia : It is disorder in which the concentration of glucose in the blood is high . 25. Hypoglycemia : It is a condition in which the concentration of glucose in the blood is very low . Pneumonia : Acute inflamation of alveoli of lung . 27. Emphysema : It is the abnormal distension of alveoli . which result in the loss of elasticity . Cigarette smoke and chronic bronchitis are two main causes . 28. Cancer The uncontrolled growth of cell by its multiplication . There are four type of cancer : > Carcinoma : It is also known as skin cancer occur in epithelial tissue , cause by ultravoilet rays of sun . Sarconoma : Cancerous growth in connective tissue , bones , cartilage and muscles is called sarconoma . Leukaemia : Abnormal growth in the number of leucocytes , also known as blood cancer . Lymphonoma : Cancerous growth occur in lymph node or spleen . 29. Chemotharapy Chemotharapy is used in the treatment of cancer . 30. Haemophilia : It is a genetic disease in which blood loss the ability of clotting . 31.Presbyopia : It is a defect of vision which arises due to diminishing flexibility of the eye lens lossing the ability to focus on object . It is an age related condition due to loss of flexibility of lens . It is corrected by using bifocal lens . 32. Bulimia : A man who does not know when to stop eating is suffering from bulimia . 33. Siderosis : This is a disease caused by inhalation of iron dust ... 34. Myopia is corrected by using concave lens . 35. Shortness of breath is known as Dyspnea . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
C. Diseases caused by Fungus :

1. Asthma : The spores of the fungi , namely Aspergillus fumigatus reaches the lungs of the human and constitutes . net like formation , thus , obstructs the function of lungs . This is a infectious disease .
2. Athlete's foot : This disease is caused by the fungi namely Tinea pedis through contact with infected skin . This is an infectious disease of skin which spreads mainly through direct contact with an infected person .
3. Baldness : This is caused by the fungi namely Taenia . capitis . Due to this hair of the head falls .

4. Ringworm : The disease ringworm is caused by fungi like Trichophyton Microsporum and epidermophyton . Ringwormisa commonskin infection causing circular rashes on skin which is usually red and itchy . This disease is also known as dermatophyte . It may spread from an infected area to other part of the body like scalp , nail , feet etc.
Some Other Diseases :

1. Paralysis or Hemiplegia : In this disease within a few ☐ minutes half of the body is paralyzed : The nerves of the paralyzed part become inactive . The reason of this disease is due to high blood pressure bursting of any blood vessels of brain or insufficient supply of blood to brain .

2. Allergy : Some substance like dust , smoke , chemical , clothes , cold are dangerous to some persons . There are reactions in their body , which causes various like problems Itching , pimples , swelling in body , black spot , eczema etc. are the examples of allergy . Asthama is also triggered by allergy which cause difficult breathing due to inflamation @ ap
☐ of bronchi and bronchioles .
3. Schizophrenia : This is a mental disease which usually found in youth . The patient considers the imagination as a truth , not to the facts . These patients are lazy , emotionless etc. Electropathy is helpful in this disease .
4. Epilepsy : This disease is caused by the internal disturbance of brain . In this disease , foam coming out of the mouth and the patient fell down unconsciously . Epilepsy is a disorder resulting in abnormal electrical discharges from brain cells causing seizuries . 5. Diplopia : This disease is caused by the paralysis of muscles of the eyes , in which double image is formed . 6. Bronchitis : It is caused by the inflammation of tubes leading from the wind pipe to lungs . 7. Colds This is highly infectious disease and is caused by a virus which result in bad throat , headache and watery nose . 8. Colic : Severe pain in the abdomen caused by spasm of the internal organs usually the intestines .. 9. Delirium : It is a serious mental disturbance occurring under the influence of poisonous drugs . " 10. Hydrophobia : A disease cause by bite of a mad dog . 11. Hyper metropia ( long sightedness ) : One can see the object of longer distance but not the object of nearer one . It can be corrected by convex lens . 12. Myopia ( short sightedness ) : In this disease person can see the object of nearer distance but can not see the object of longer distance . It is corrected by using concave lens . 13. Hypokalemia : It is a deficiency disease caused by severe deficiency of mineral potassium .
TATANILA⑈144461

36. Loss of smell is known as Anosmia . 37. Sleep disorder is known as Insomnia . 38. Eating disorder is known as Anorexia .
Inventor / Discoverer
Inventions / Discoveries Father of Surgery Father of Medicine Some Important facts :
Sushruta Hippocrates

8. Miscellaneous
The study of dreams is called Oneirology .
2. The study of the beauty of human is called Kalology .
3. At the time of creation of life there was no oxygen .
4. The strongest part in the body is the enamel of teeth . 5. The sex determination of human depends on male sex chromosomes . 6. The fastest nervous speed is 532 kmph . 7. The internal area of the lungs of human is 93 sq . m . which is forty times of the external area of the body . S. The bones are as strong as concrete and as hard as granite . 9. Inside the body approximately 150 lakh cells are destroyed every second . : 10 . The weight of the uterus of the woman which has not given birth to a child is 50 grams and after giving birth to a child the weight becomes 100 grams . 11. The weight of the kidney is approximately 150 grams . 12. In a single inhaling , a normal adult takes 500 ml air inside the body . 13. The capacity of heart to pump the blood is 4.5 liters per minute . 14. The length of the small intestine is approximately 7 meter and its diameter is 2.5 centimeter .
1 .
Medicinal Discoveries Inventions / Discoveries
Inventor / Discoverer F. G. Hopkins , Cosimir Funk Mc . Collum
Vitamin
Vitamin - A
Vitamin - B
Mc . Collum
Vitamin - C
Holst
Vitamin - D Sulpha drugs Streptomycin Heart Transplantation Homoeopathy
Mc . Collum
Dagmanck ( Dogmanck ) Selman Waksmann
Christian Bernard Hahnemann
Malaria parasite and treatment Ronald Ross Diarrhoea and treatment of plague Kitajato
Sex hormone
Stenach
Open heart surgery .
Waltalliléhak
Pincus
Contraceptive pills
First test tube baby : Electrocardiograph
Edwards and Stepto Iwanyaan Karl Landsteiner James Watson and Arther Arg James Watson and Crick Banting Harrison and Sympson Edward Jenner Robert Koch
Antigen
RNA
DNA
Insulin Chloroform
The blood circulation inside the body takes approximately 23 seconds . @apna_kiraThe antibiotic namely , penicillin is obtained from
15 .
Vaccine of chicken pox T.B. bacteria .
penicillium fungus .
• Diabetes
Banting

17. Human is the most intelligent hominid of the universe . 18. Albatross is the largest sea bird , whose spread of feather is 10-12 ft . 19. There are approximately 50 lakhs hair in the body of
Alexander Flemming
Penicillin
Polio vaccine
Johan E. Salk .
BCG .
Guerin Calmatte Luwenhook - Leeuwenhock
Bacteria
. human .
Molecular Biology . Microbiology
J.D. Watson Louis Pasteur Charles Darwin Karl Landsteiner

20. In the initial stage of formation of placenta , H.C.G. hormones flow in a large quantity and excreted through urine . At this time , in the testing of urine due to presence of this hormone pregnancy test is carried out . 21. The heart beat of a child is more than that of an adult . 22. A single respiration completes in 5 seconds i.e. 2 seconds of inspiration and 3 seconds of expiration . 23. Everyday blood in the body of the human carries approximately 550 liters of oxygen to the cells of the body . Out of this 97 % oxygen is carried by haemoglobin and remaining 3 % is circulated by blood plasma . 24. Zinc sulphide is used as rodenticide . 25. First child born after operative procedure was caesar . 26. The largest living ape is Gorilla .. 27. Fish is first class protein as it contain essential amino
Evolution
Blood transfer
* Funk named it Vitamine ( in 1912 )
Important Informations Largest and heaviest mammal
Blue whale
African elephant Sea turtle ( Tortoise ) Ostrich
Largest land mammal
Largest living reptile
Largest living bird
Python
Largest snake .
Gorilla
Largest monkey .
Smallest bird
Humming - bird
Smallest mammal
Shrew
Ostrich's egg Cheetah ( Panther ) Spine tailed Swift Echidna and Duckbiled Platypus Giraffe ( Africa )
Largest egg
- acid .
Fastest running animal : Fastest flying bird Egg lying mammal Tallest mammal Busiest human organ Immunization
28 . :: The soil which are rich in calcium are known as pedocals . 29. Contour farming is a biological method of soil
conservation .

30. Vermi composting is done by worm .
Heart dwars
ASHA :
Accredited social health activist . It is a national
Join on Telegram

36. Dolphin of Ganga river is known as National aquatic animal of India . 37. Central food Technology Research is situated at Mysore . 38. Altitude sickness is caused at high attitude due to low partial pressure of oxygen . 39. " Mission Indradhanush " launched by the government of India pertain to immunization of children and pregnent women . 40. Sarpgandha is a plant that is used to treat blood pressure , only found in India . 41. The process of using microbes to treat areas of land or sea that have been contaminated by pesticides , oil or solvent is known as Bioremediation . 42. The magnatic field inside the body forms the basis of obtaining the image of different body parts and this technique is called " MRI " . 43. Indian verterinary institute is located at Bareilly . 44. The web portal DACNET is related to e - Agriculture .

45. The minimum distance of clear vision for a normal healthy eye of human is supposed to be 25 cm ..

46. Isotope of carbon is used in calculation of age of ear @ apna_kiran , - 47. Capsules of medicines is usually made up of gelatin .
Isotope of Cobalt is used in the treatment of cancer . Isotope of Iodine is used in the treatment of goitre . Isotope of Radium is used in the secondary treatment of cancer . Bio - rock technology is talked about restoration of damaged coral reefs ..

48. Melanin pigment is responsible for colour of human skin . 49. The word Denisovan refere to an early human species sometime mentioned in media .
Join on Telegram @apna channels

1. Firsts in India
First Governor General of India ( after independence and last Britis Governor General of India ) . Lord Louis Mountbatten ( 15 Aug , 1947-20 June , 1948 ) First Indian Cosmonaut ( to go into space ) Sqn Ldr . Rakesh Sharma First temporary President of the Constitutent Assembly Dr. Sachchida Nand Sinha First Commander - in - Chief of Free India General K.M. Cariappa First Indian Nobel Laureate Rabindra Nath Tagore First Indian Judge of the International Court of Justice
First Atomic Reactor
Apsara ( 1956 )
First Nuclear Submarine launched by India ( SSBN ) . INS Arihant
First Nuclear Submarine ( SSN )
INS Chakra INS Kalvan INS Vikrant
First Submarine .
First indigenous aircraft carrier Indian Ship First Intermediate range Ballistic Missile
Agni
First indigenously developed ballistic missile [ produced by the Integrated Guided Missile Development Program ( IGMDP ) ] known as first Indian Missile First Indian Prime Minister to loose an Election
Dr. Nagendra Singh
Prithvi
First Indian to get Bharat Ratna Award- First Field Marshal ..
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan
Indira Gandhi .
General S.F.J. Manckshaw
Hyderabad . Harsha Chawda
First Army Institute of Information Technology
The President of Constituent Assembly Dr. Rajendra Prasad First Indian to swim across the English Channel First Indian to get Jnanpeeth Award First Muslim President of Indian Republic
First Test Tube Baby of India
Mihir.Sen G. Shankar Kurup
Kolkata ( 1727 )
First Post - Office opened in India
Bhanu Athaiya
First Indian recipient of ' Oscar Award '
Dr. Zakir Hussain
First Atomic Power station
Tarapur
First Indian to win Palk - Strait Ocean Swimming Contest
New Delhi ( 1951 ) : Nalanda University New Delhi ( 1951 ) 15th August , 1982 Raja Harishchandra . 1913 ( Director and producer - Dadasaheb Phalke )
First Asian Games :
spoilt na postane , Baidyanath Nath First Speaker of Lok Sabha G.V. Mavlankar ( 1952-57 ) First person to make Printing Press popular in India James Hicky First Education Minister of Independent India
First Organised University
First Doordarshan Centre
First Colour Television Broadcast First Silent M
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
First President of Indian Republic ..
Dr. Rajendra Prasad : Pt . Jawahar Lal Nehru
@apna kira
First Prime Minister of Independent India First Home Minister of Independent India
First Indian Talkie Talking or Sound Film Alam Ara , 1931 ( Director - Ardeshir First Technicolor Film Jhansi Ki Rani ( Director - Sohrab Modi ) First 3D Film : My dear Kuttichathan ( Malayalam ) First Sponsored TV Serial ( Drama Series ) / Soap Opera
Irani )
Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel .
First Vice President of Independent India Dr. S. Radhakrishnan First Chief of Air Staff Air Marshal Sir Thomas Elmhirst First Indian Air Chief of India Air Marshal Subroto Mukherjee First Chief of Army Staff
Hum Log ( 1954 ) Hicky's Bengal Gazette ( 1779 ) Jaipur ( Rajasthan )
First News paper
General Maharaja Sri Rajendra Singh Ji Jadeja First Chief of Naval Staff of India .... Vice - Admiral R.D. Katari First CDS ( Chief of Defence Staff ) of India First Person to get Paramvir Chakra First Indian Scientist to get Nobel Prize First Scientist of Indian origin , to get Nobel Prize in the field of Medical Science Dr. Hargobind Khorana Fa - hien First Chinese pilgrim to visit India : First Scientist of Indian origin to win Nobel Prize in Physics Subramanyan Chandrasekhar First NSA ( National Security Advisor ) of India Brajesh Mishra First Indian to win Stalin Award Saifuddin Kitchlew First Indian to win Magsaysay Award Acharya Vinoba Bhave ( 199 ) India's first minister to resign from Union Cabinet
First Woman Employment Exchange Office First high speed rural Broadband Network India's First passenger drone
Idukki ( Kerala ) Varuna
Gen. Bipin Rawat Major Somnath Sharma C.V. Raman ( Physics )
First Hydel Power Plant in India was started
Darjiling ( W.B. ) in 1898 “ July 1 , 1852 1880
First postal stamp was launched in India First Money Order System in India was launched

2. Firsts in India ( Male )
Lord Clive ( 1757-60 ) Warren Hastings ( 1772-74 ) Warren Hastings ( 1774-85 ) st Governor General of India Lord William Bentinck ( 1833-35 ) Last Governor General and First Viceroy of India Lord Canning ( 1856-52 ) First President of Indian National Congress WC Barere First and Last Indian Governor General of Independent India Rajgopalachari ( 21.06.1945 - 25.01.1950 ) Satyendra Nath Tagore ( 1863 ) Satyendra Nath Tagore ( Yol * 1854 )
First Govenor of Bengal
Last Governor of Bengal
First Governor General of Bengal
Shyama Prasad Mukherjee ( 192
Sukumar San
India's first Election Commissioner First Muslim President of Indian National Congress
Badruddin Tayab Justice Hiralal . Kasi
First Chief Justice of India
Man to pass ICS . First Indian ICS Officer * Yoffer of Joining
First Person to submit the proposal of Indian Independence in Congress Session
Maulana Hasra ! f
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. Firsts in India ( Female )
First Female Driver in Indian Railways
First Woman President
First Female Fighter Pilot of IAF
Smt . Pratibha Patil Smt . Indira Gandhi
First Female Pilot to fly solo in the Indian Air Force Harita Kaur Deol apnfirst Female Lieutenant General
First Woman Prime Minister
First Woman Governor
Sarojini Naidu Razia Sultan Kiran Bedi Sucheta Kriplani ( U.P. )
Punita Arora Padma Bandopadhyay
First Female Air Marshal
First Woman ruler ( on Delhi's throne )
First Female Chairperson of Indian Airlines : First Indian Female to win Oscar Award First Indian Female to ski to the South Pole
Sushma Chawala Bhanu Athaiya
First Woman I.P.S. officer
First Woman Chief Minister of a state
First Woman Union Minister / First Union Health Minister .
Rina Kaushal Dharmshaktu First Female Sea channels off Five Continents Bula Choudhary First Female to walk across Gobi Desert Sucheta Kadethankar . First Female Secretary General of Rajya Sabha V. S. Ramadevi First Female Actress Nominated for Rajya Sabha First Female to reach Antarctica : First Female recipient of Sahitya Akademi Award First Female participant of Olympic Games First Female Actress .
Rajkumari Anirita Kaur Annie Besant
First Woman President of INC First Woman Judge of the Suprime Court Meera Sahib Fatima Bibi . First Woman to get Ashok Chakra Ninja Bhanot First Indian Woman Ambassador at United Nations Vijayalakshmi Pandit First Indian Woman to swim across English Channel Arati Saha ( Gupta ) First Indian Woman to get the Noble Prize Mother Teresa ( 1979 ) First Indian Woman to climb the Mt. Everest Bachendri Pal First Indian Woman to become ' Miss World ' Miss Reita Faria First Indian Woman to climb the ' Mt. Everest ' twice Santosh Yadav First Indian Woman to become ' Miss Universe ' Sushmita Sen
Nargis Mehar Moos Amrita Pritam Nilima Chose
Devika Rani ,
First Female chairperson of Rashtriya Mahila Ayog Jayani Patnayak First Female News reader of Doordarshan
Pratima Puri
First Female Olympic Silver Medalist in Badminton First Female Olympic medallist in Badminton First Female medallist in wrestling at Olympic First Female to get Bronze Medal in Boxing at Olympic Marry Kom ( 2012 , London Olympic )
P. V. Sindhu Saina Nehval Sakshi Mallick
First Indian Woman to get Bharat Ratna 1 Smt . Indira Gandhi
First Woman to get Jnanpith Award .
Ashapurna Deyi Sania Mirza
First Indian Woman to win WTÄ Title
First Female Foreign Secretary First Female to hit Double Ton in Cricket : First Indian Woman Cricketer to score 10,000 International Runs Mithall
First Indian Woman Pilot of Indian Airlines First Indian Woman to fly an aircraft :
Durba Banerjee Sarla Thakral
Chokla ver Mithall Re
First Indian Woman to win a Gold in Asian Games
Kamaljeet Sandhu First Indian Woman President of I. N. Congress Sarojini Naidu ( 1925 ) First Indian Woman to win the Booker Prize Arundhati Roy First Woman Musician to get Bharat Ratna MS Subbulakshmi
First Female to qualify for Olympic Gymnastic Dips . First Female Indian Member of International Olympic Commit
First Female Indian Cricketer to get 100 wickets Diana Ed Join on Telegram @apna_channels

5. Superlatives ( India ) ( Biggest , Highest , Largest , Longest , Smallest etc. )
The longest river Bridge
Neil Armstrong ( U.S.A. )
Bhupen Hazarika ( Dhola Sadiya ) Bridge ( 9,150 mi ) Sonepur ( Bihar ) Sri Shanmukhanand Hall ( Mumbù ) . Vembanad ( Kerala ) .
First man to go into space Major Yuri Alekseyevich Gagarin ( USSR ) , First Space Shuttle launched .
The largest animal Fair
Columbia ( April 12 , 1981 ) Viking - I ( July 20 , 1976 ) First Woman Prime Minister of England Margaret Thacher First Woman Prime Minister of any muslim country Benazir Bhutto ( Pakistan )
The largest Auditorium The largest Lake
First Space Ship landed on Mars
The highest Dam Tehri Dam , on Bhagirathi river ( Uttarakhand ) The largest Desert The largest cave Temple Kailash Temple ( Ellora , Maharashtra ) The largest Mosque The highest Peak The longest Tunnel .
Thar ( Rajasthan )
First Woman Prime Minister of a country Sirimavo Bhandarnaike ( Sri Lanka ) . First Woman cosmonaut in space Valentina Tereshkova ( USSR ) First Woman to climb Mt. Everest First female amputee in the world to climb Mt. Everest
Jama Masjid ( Dēlhi ) Godwin Austen / K - 2 ( 8,611 n
Junko Tabei ( Japan )
Chenani - Nashri ( Patnitop ) Tunnel , NH - 440 & K )
The largest Delta The longest Corridor
Sundarbans ( WeBengal ) Corridor of Ramnathswami Templeat Rameswarani ( Tamil Nadu ) ,
Arunima Sinha
First deaf and dumb to cross the Srait of Gibralter Taranath Shenoy ( India ) First Woman President of UN General Assembly Smt . Vijayalakshmi Pandit ( 1953 ) First European Invader of Indian soil Alexander , The Great First Woman to reach the North Pole , First Woman to Ski across Antarctica , First Woman to reach South Pole , First Woman to cross Arctic ice to the North Pole
The highest Waterfall The longest National Highway
Jog or Garseppa
NH - 14 ( Srinagar - Kanyakumar ) ) ( 3,7lī km ) Buland Darwaza , Fatelipur SIRTI ( UP ) )
The highest Gateway The longest River The largest Museum
The Gangli
Indian Museum , Kolkata
Ann Bancroft
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

6. Superlatives ( World ) ( The Largest , Biggest , Smallest , Longest , Highest etc. ) Tallest Animal ( on land )
Longest Platform ( Railway ) Gorakhpur ( UP ) India ( 1366.33 m ) Largest Platform ( Railway )
Grand Central Terminal , New York ( U.S.A )
Giraffe Tsar Hell . Moscow Peregrine Falcon ( 322 km / hr )
Port of Shanghai ( China )
Largest Port
Biggest Bell
Port of Shanghai ( China ) ,
Busiest Port
Fastest Bird
Trans - Siberian Railway ( 5,772 miles fons Nile ( 6690 km ) , Amazon ( 6570 )
Longest Railway
Ostrich Bee Humming Bird
Largest Bird Smallest Bird
Longest River
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

8. National Emblems of Some Countries Country Emblem
Amazon , Brazil Ramanathaswamy Temple's Corridor , Rameshwaram ( 5000 feet ) Bhaklira Dam ( India )
Longest Corridor .
Emblem New Zealand Silver fern
Country
India Lion Capital Bangladesh Water Lily
Highest Straight Gravity Dam
་ ་
Germany
The Federal Eagle
Highest Capital City
La Paz ( Bolivia )
Netherlands : Coat of arm
Norway
Coat of arms
Largest Asian desert
Gobi , Mongolia
France .
UK USA
Lily
Largest Democracy
India
fran
Largest Neck Animal
Lion and Sun
Giraffe
Largest Animal of the Cat Family
Italy
Coat of arms
Spain
Lion
Eagle
Most Intelligent Animal
Chimpanzee
Maple Leaf Lily
Join on Telegram @apha channels

9. National Animals of Some Countries .
Wheel ( Chakra )
Symbol of progress Symbol of peace National Flag of India National Flag of the U.K.
Animal SI
Country
S. Country
Animal
5 .
Olive Branch
Australia Red Kangaroo

2. Bhutan
Takin
Tricolour

3. Thailand Elephant

4. Netherlands
Lion
Union Jack
India
Bison

5. USA
Stars and Stripes
National Flag of the U.S.A. 12. Some Official Books ( World ) Green Book Official reports or publications of Italy & Iran White Book The official publications of Portugal , China and Germany Blue Book Any official report of the British government Yellow Book The report or publication of the French government Orange Book Official report of the government of Netherlands White Paper The authoritative recital of facts issued by the government stating its views on a particular matter Grey Book Report of the government of Belgium and Japan Joint Paper Thejointreport of two or more than two governments Black Book A book containing a list of secret contacts or of the names of the people to be punished . 13. Newspapers & Place of Publication ( World )
6 ; "
Tiger
* National Aquatic Animal of India : Gangetic Dolphin .

10. Parliaments of Some Countries '
Country
Parliament
Sansad ( Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha ) National Assembly
Indi
Pakistan Britain
Parliament ( House of Commons and House of Lords ) Germany Bundstag ( Lower House ) and Bundesrat ( Upper House ) Switzerland The Federal Assembly U.S.A ... Congress ( House of Representatives and Senate ) Bhutan Gyelyong Tshokhomg ( Earlier , it was Tshogdu ) Bangladesh Jatiyo Sangsad
Norway
Stortinget
Cortes Generales
Spain
Australia Federal Parliament Myanmar Pyithu Hluttaw ( People's Assembly ) Nepal
Newspaper ,
Flack
Newspaper Place
London London
The Times
The Gardian
Federal Parliament of Nepal ( Earlier it was Rashtriya Panchayat )
Daily Mirror
Daily Mail
Folketing
Denmark
Le Figaro , Charlie Paris Hebdo w
Le Monde
Federal Assembly ( Duma and Federation Council ) National People's Congress French National Assembly . The Grand National Assembly of Turkey Majlis s
Russia
Pravda
Novye Izvestia The Island
Moscow
China
Colombo
France
Khaleej Times
@apna
Mainichi Shimbun Tokyo
Turkey
Eastern Sun Al Ahram
Singapore
Iran
Cairo
People's Daily
Beijing
Afghanistan National Assembly ( Shora ) * : Israel Knesset
Jakarta
La Republica
Mardeka
Rome
Washington Post Washington New York Times New York
Daily News
New York
Maldives
People's Majlis
Financial Times Independent
London
The National Diet
Japan
Johanesberg
Star
London
Canada
Parliament
The Times of India New Delhi , India The Hindu
The Sun
U.K.
Daily Telegraph London

11. Some Important Signs or Symbols
New Statesman ,
Symbol of Culture & Civiliz Culture and Civilization Red Cross Society ... Revolution ; also sign of danger Symbol of protest
China Times
U.K.
Pen
Red Flag Bangladesh Observer
China :
Toronto Star Dawn
Lotus Red Cross Red Flag Black Flag
Dhaka

14. United Nations
The name ' United Nations ' was adopted on suggestion of the then US President F.D. Rooswelt . To prepare the format of the UN , a meeting of representatives of prominent countries held from 21st- August to 7th October , 1944 at Dumbarton Ox building in Washington . The UNO was formed on the 24th October 1945 . The Charter of the UN was signed on the 26th June , 1945 by representatives of 50 nations , though the number of founder member countries was 51 who attended the San Fransisco Conference . Later on Poland signed the Charter and become the 51st founder member . At present 193 countries are members of the UN . South Sudan is the latest ( 193rd ) member . The UN Charter came into force on October 24 , 1945 , when the Governments of China , France , the U.K. , the Soviet Union and the U.S.A. and a majority of other diagonally . Join on Telegram @apna channels
Yellow Flag
ne :
Flown on ships or vehicles carrying patients suffering from infectious diseases Flag flown upside down Symbol of Distress Flag flown at half mast Symbol of National mourning
Symbol of Truce Sign of Family Planning . Symbol of Peace Traffic sign of ‘ Stop ' , also sign of ' Danger or ' Emergency ' Line clear signal or traffic sign of ' Goʻ
White Flag
Red Tringle
Pegion or Dove Red Light
Green Light
A blindfolded woman Symbol of Justice holding a balanced scale
Black strip on fore arm or protest
One skull on two bones Sign of Danger
other
each
Crossing

15. World Organisations and their Headquarters BRICS ( Brazil - Russia - India - China - South Africa ) Shanghai , China European Union ( EU ) ****** GATT ( General Agreement on Tariffs & Trade ) Amnesty International Asian Development Bank ( ADB ) Mandaluyong ( Philippines ) ASEAN ( Assosiation of South - East Asian Nations )
Geneva Rome ( Italy )
International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) ,
City of Brussels , Belgium
Montreal ( Canada )
Geneva London ( England )
International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD ) Rome
¢ ? Su " -h " 4 !, ..
International Labour Organisation ( ILO )
Geneva
International Monetary Fund ( IMF )
Washington
International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) :
Geneva .
Jakarta ( Indonesia )
United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organisa ( UNESCO )
NATO ( North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ) Brussels ( Belgium ) African Union ( AU ) . Addis - Ababa ( Ethopia ) International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) . A Gener ( Switzerland )
Paris
Universal Postal Union ( UPU )
Bern ( Switzerland )
World Health Organisation ( WHO )
Geneva
World Intellectual Property Organisation ( WIPO )
SAARC ( South Asian Association for Regional Corporation ) Kathmandu ( Nepal ) United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) Nairobi ( Kenya ) INTERPOLE ( International Police ) .
Geneva
World Meteorological Organisation ( WMO )
Geneva
Voluntary Service Overseas ( VSO )
London
Woman Aid International
London
Lyons ( France )
European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) -
World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) ( w.e.f. Jan 1 , 1995 )
Geneva
Organisation of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries
Geneva ( Switzerland )
Kuwait
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) ( World Bank )
League of Arab Stätes :
Cairo ( Egypt ) Geneva Luxembourg Economic Commission of Africa ( ECA ) Addis Ababa Economic Commission of West Asia ( ECWA ) Beirut , Lebanon United Nations High Commission for Refugees ( UNHCR ) Genevá International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) Vienna ( Austria ) United Nations Industrial Development Organisation ( UNIDO )
World Council of Churches ( WCC )
Washington
Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development . ( OECD ) = Organisation of the Islamic Conference ( OIC ) :
European Energy Commission ( EEC )
Jeddah , Saudi Arabia

16. Secretary Generals of UNO and their Tenure Name Tanurg 1.Trygve Lie ( 1 UN Secy Gen. ) Norway nna ( Austria ) . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
1916

7. Dag Hammarskjold ;
Sweden
1953-1961
25 January 26 January 26 January January
Republic Day ( India )
U - Thant
Myanmar ( Burma ) 1961 - 1971
International Custom Excise Day
Kurt Waldheim
Austria
1972-1981
International Day of Commemoration in Memory
Javier Perez de Cuellar .
Peru
1982-1991
of the Victims of the Holocaust
Boutros Boutros Ghali
Egypt
1992-1996
Martyrs ' Day ( India )
30 January
( 1 African UN Secy . Gen. )
30 January
Leprosy Prevention Day
Kofi Annan
Ghana
1997-2005
Sarvodaya Day ( India )
30 January
Ban - Ki - moon
S. Korea
2007-2016 2017-
February
Antonio Guterres
Portugal
World Epilepsy Day
2nd Monday 4th February

17. United Nations
International Weeks World Interfaith Harmony Week
World Cancer Day World Radio Day . Valentine Day World Day of Social Justice International Mother Language Day Central Excise Tax Day ( India ) National Science Day March World Wildlife Day
1 to 7 February ( 1 Week of February ) March 21 to 27 .
13th
February
14th February 20th February
Week of Solidarity with the people struggling against Racism and Racial .Discrimination
21 February
Global Soil Week
April 19 to 23 : April 24 to 30 May 8 to 14 , 2017 May 25 to 31
24th February
World Immunization Week ( WHO ] Global Road Safety Week [ WHO ] . Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non - Self - Governing Territories World Breastfeeding Week ( WHO ) World Space Week Disarmament Week November 6 to 12 ( the week International Week of Science and in which11 Novemberfalls ) Peace ,
28th February
3 March
National Safety Day ( Security of Industrial Institutions ) International Women's Day , UN Day for Women's Rights & International Peace
4th March 8th March
August 1 to 7 October 4 to 10 : October 24 to 30
2nd Monday ,
Commonwealth Day
World Kidney Day
10 March
Central Industrial Security Force Foundation Day World Consumer Rights Day Ordnance Factories Day .
10 March
World Antibiotic Awareness Week World Heritage Week
Nov. 13 to 19
15 March
Nov 19 to 25
18th March
( Source : UNI
20th March
International Day of Happiness @apna_Kira Parrow Day

18. International Years
20th March
World Forestry Day , International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination World Water Day World Meteorological Day Ram Manohar Lohia's Birthday ( Anniversary ) Bhagat Singh , Sukhdev & Rajguru's Martyrdam Day World TB ( Tuberculosis ) Day
21 March
2013 International Year of Water Cooperation 2014 International Year of Crystallography , International Year of Family Farming , International Year of Small Island Developing States , International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People 2015 International Year of Light and Light - based Technologies , International Year of Soils 2016 International Year of Pulses , International Year of Camelids : 2017 International Year of Sustainable Tourism for Development 2019 International Year of Indigenous Languages , International Year of Moderation , International Year of the Periodic Table of Chemical Elements 2022 International Year of Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture 2023 International Year of Millets
22nd March
23rd March
23rd March
23rd March
24th March
25th March
Sacrifice Day of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi National Day of Bangladesh
26 March
27th March
World Theatre Day
April Area World Autism Awareness Day International Day for Mine Awareness and Assistance in Mine Action .
April
National Maritime Day
2024 International Year of Camelids 225 International Year of Glaciers Preservation . International Year of Peace and Trust 2025 International Year of Volunteers for Sustainable Development 2027 International Year of Sustainable and Resilient Tourism 19. Important Days ( India and World ) January
April
World Health Day
8th April
Special Protection Group ( SPG ) Foundation Day CRPF Valour Day
9th April
10th April
World Homeopathy Day ( Birth day of Samuel Hanimen )
14 April
Ambedkar's Birth Anniversary .
17th April
World Haemophilia Day
4th January
Louis Braille Day
18th April
World Heritage Day / International Day for Monuments and Sites
Pravasi Bhartiya Diwas ( Non Resident Indian Day ) 9th January World Hindi Day National Youth Day ( Birthday of Swami Vivekanand ) 12 January Army Day ( India )
21 April
10 January
Indian Civil Service Day
April
International Mother Earth Day
World Books and Copyright Day Panchayat Divas ( India )
23 April 24th Apri
15 January
24 January
Rashtriya Balika Diwas
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

21. Qutub Minar and its Momuments ( Delhi )
21 November
1993

22. Mountain Railways ( Darjeeling Himalayan Rly . 1999-2003 1999 , Neelgiri Mountain Rly . - 2005 , Kalka - Shimla Rlv . - 2008 ) 23. Mahabodhi Temple , Bodh Gaya ( Bihar ) 24. Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka ( MP ) :
3rd Thursday of November
International Day for the Elimination of Violence 25th November Against Women National Law Day / Constitution Day ( India ) . 26th November International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian 29th November People
2002
2003

25. Champaner - Pavagadh Park ( Gujarat )
2004

26. Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus ( CST ) , Mumbai 27. Red Fort ( Lal Quila ) Complex , Delhi - 28. Jantar Mantar of Jaipur ( Rajasthan )
2004
Decber
2007
World AIDS Day
1st December
2010
2nd December
International Day for the Abolition of Slavery

29. Western Ghats
2012
World Disabled Day / International Day of Persons with Disabilities , Dr. Rajendra Prasad's Birth Day . India )
3rd December

30. Hill Forts of Rajasthan ( 6majesticforts ) ( Chittorgarh , 2013 Kumbhalgarh , Sawai Madhopur , Jhalawar , Jaipur and Jaisalmer Fort ) .
Navy Day ( India ) . International Volunteers Day International Civil Aviation Day Armed Forces Flag Day :
December

31. Rani - ki - Vav ( the Queen's Stepwell ) at Patan , Gujarat 32. Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area 33. Archaeological Site of Nalanda Mahavihara ( Nalanda University ) , ( Bihar )
2014
5th December
2014
7th December
2016
7th December
9th December
International Anti - Corruption Day

34. The Architectural work of Le Corbusier , an 2016 Outstanding Contribution to the Modern Movement ( Chandigarh )
International Human Rights Day
10th December
11th December
World Children's Fund Day

35. Khangchendzonga National Park ( Sikkim ) **
2016
11th December
International Mountain Day

36. Historic City of Ahmedabad
2017
11th December
World Asthma Day :

37. Victoriam Gothic and Art - Deco Ensembles of Mumbai 2018
National Energy Conservation Day
14th December .
2019 ,

38. Jaipur City , Rajasthan
International Migrants Day .
18th December

39. Dholavira : a Harappan City
2021
Goa Liberation Day . " .
19th December

40. Kakatiya Rudreshwara ( Ramappa ) Temple , Telangana
2021
International Human Solidarity Day
20th December
Kisan Divas ( Birthday of Chaudhary Charan Singh ) 23rd Decembe apna 41 - Sacred Ensembles of Hoysalas
2023
National Consumer Day
24th December
ran
2023

42. Santiniketan ( West Bengal )
X - mas Day
25th December
2024

43. Moidams - the Mound - Burial System of the Ahom ☐ Dynasty
Good Governance Day
25th December

20. UNESCO's World Heritage Sites ( India )

21. Famous Tourist Spots of India _______ Site_________Location
Site
Year of
Founder
inclusion
Buddhists .
Mumbai
Kanheri Caves . "
1 Ajanta Caves ( Maharashtra )
1983 .
Rashtrakutas Gupta Rulers Buddhists Chandela Kings , Raja Madan Shah Raja Man Singh Tomar Mohammad Bin Tughlaq

2. Ellora Caves ( Maharashtra )
Mumbai
1983
Elephanta Caves

3. Agra Fort ( U.P. ) .
4. Taj Mahal ( U.P. ) .
1983 '
Aurangabad
Ajanta Caves
· 1982
Aurangabad Khajuraho ( M.P ) Jabalpur ( M.P. ) Gwalior ( M.P. )
Ellora Caves

5.Sun Temple , Konark ( Odisha )
1984 :
Kandaria Mahadev

6.Mahabalipuram Temples ( TN )
1984
Madan Palace ..

7. Kaziranga National Park ( Assam )
1985 :
Mrignayani Palace

8. Manas Wildlife Sanctuary ( Assam )
1985
Dhar ( M.P. )
Dhar Fort
9 Keoladeo National Park ( Rajasthan )
1985
Golconda Fort
Hyderabad .
Qutubshahi
10 : Churches and Convents of Goa
1986
( Telangana )
11 Khajuraho Temples ( M.P )
1986
Kerala
Cochin Fort
Portuguese

12. Monuments at Hampi ( Karnataka ) .
1986 :
Chittorgarh ( Raj . ) Rana Kumbha
Vijay Stambh

13. Fatehpur Sikri ( UP )
1986

14. Pattadakal Temples ( Karnataka )
Delhi :
Qutub - ud - din Albak
Qutub Minar
1987
Adhai Din Ka Jhopda Ajmer ( Raj . )
15 : Elephanta Caves
1987
Quṭub - ud - din Aibak Alauddin Khilji Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq
16 : Sundarbans National Park ( W.B ) .
1987
Delhi
Hauz Khas

17. Chola Temples , Brihadishwara Temple , Thanjavur 1987-2004 ( 1987 ) , Brihadishwara Temple , Gangaikonda Cholapuram , Airavateshwara Temple ( 2004 )
Delhi
Tughlakabad
Delhi
Firozshah Kotla
Firoz Shah Tughlaq Raja Nagar Singh
Bundi ( Raj . )
18 Nanda Devi and Valley of Flowers National Parks 1988-2005 19 Sanchi Stupa ( MP )
Bundi Fort
Udaipur
1989
Pichhola Lake . Kankaria Lake
20 Humayun's Tomb ( Delhi ) .
1993
Sultan Qutub - ud - din
Ahmedabad
Join on Telegram @aph HeGlavannin
cted in 1156 ) ..

3. Air Force : The Chief is an Air Chief Marshal ranked
' Chief of the Air Staff ' . Its headquarters is in New Delhi The Air force is organized into seven commands ( five Operational and two Functional Commands ) :
Headquarters
Command Operational Commands Air Command
* Production ( iii ) Department of Defence Researchapna and Development ( iv ) Department of Ex - Serviceman Welfare . In the contemporary world India has the fourth largest army in the world , the fifth largest air force and the seventh largest navy . According to INDIA 2022 , a post of Chief of Defence Staff ( CDS ) was created in 2019 , in the rank of a 1 - Star General with salary and perquisites at par with a Service Chief . Gen. Bipin Rawat , the first CDS of the country : from January , 2020 was died in an air crash . Lt Gen Anil Chauhan is the new CDS of India ..
Shillong
kin
Gandhinagar Tiruvananthpuram New Delhi Allahabad
South Western Air Command . Southern Air Command Western Air Command Central Air Command- · Functional Commands Maintenance Command . Training Command
4. Commissioned Ranks Army Air Force Air Chief Marshal Air Marshal
Nagpur Bangaluru
Navy
Admiral Vice - Admiral Rear Admiral Commodore
General Lieutenant General Major General Brigadier Colonel
According to INDIA 2024 , India is among the top 25 defence exporters of the world today . India defence exports have increased 23 fold from a mere * 2,059 crore in 2015-16 to a whopping * 15,920 core in the fiscal year 2022-23 . According to BHARAT 2025 , the Indian Armed Forces have seen a surge in the participation of women in recent times . More and more women officers are woking in the Indian Army . With a gender - neutral approach , women officers are inducted in all branches and streams of Indian Air Force . The strength of women officers in the Indian Navy is more than 750 including medical and
Air Vice - Marshal
Air Commodore Group Captain
Captain Commander
Lieutenant Colonel Wing Commander .
Squadron Leader
Major
Lieutenant
Commander Lieutenant
Flight Lieutenant
Flying Officer .
Sub Lieutenant . [ Source BHARAT 2025 ]

23. Internal Security of India Organization
Year . Headquater
Assam Rifles ( AR ) ( former Catchar Levy ) 1835 Shillong Central Reserve Police Force ( CRPF ) . National Cadet Corps ( NCC ) Territorial Army ( TA ) Indo - Tibetan Border Police ( ITBP ) Home Guards ( HG )
Dental officers .
1939 New Delhi
Armed Forces have opened entry for women candidates in NDA with 19 cadets ( including 10 for Indian Army ) joining the academy every six months . The lateral entry . of girl cadets in class XI of Rashtriya Military School has commenced from academic session 2024-25 .
1948 New Delhi 1949 In different states 1962 New Delhi 1962 In different states 1965 New Delhi
Border Security Force ( BSF )
BHARAT
Join on Telegram @apha channels

24. Defence Training Institutions of India > There are 143 defence training centres / academies in the
country . Indian Army

43. Mechanised Infantry Regimental Ahmednagar
Centre
( Maharashtra )
Name of the Training Institutes / Academies
1. National Defence Academy
Location
44 Artillery Training Centre
Nasik ( Maharashtra )

45. Bombay Engineer Group and Centre Kirkee ( Maharashtra ) 46. Guards Training Centre Army Postal Service Centre 43. Punjab Regimental Centre 49. Sikh Regimental Centre 50. Madras Engineer Group & Centre 51. Parachute Regimental Centre
Khadakvasla , Pune ( Maharashtra ) Dehradun ( Uttrakhand ) Chennai ( Tamil Nadu ) . Gaya ( Bihar )
Kamptee ( Maharashtra )
Kamptee ( Maharashtra )

2. Indian Military Academy Officer's Training Academy
4. Officer's Training Academy 5. Army War College .
Ramgarh ( Jharkhand )
Ramgarh Jharkhand ) Bangalore ( Karnataka ) Bangalore ( Karnataka )
Mhow ( Madhya Pradesh ) Mhow ( Madhya Pradesh ) .

6. Infantry School

7. College of Materials Management Jabalpur ( M.P ) ( CMM )
Maratha Light Infantry Regimental Belgaum ( Karnataka ) Centre 53 Army Service Corps Centre ( South ) Bangalore ( Karnataka ) 54 Pioneer Corps Centre .

8. AEC Training college and centre Pachmarhi ( M.P. ) 9 Military College of Telecommunica - Mhow ( M.P )
Bangalore ( Kamtaka ) Bangalore ( Karnataka ) Hyderabad ( Telangana ) Secunderabad ( Telangana )
tion ( MCTE )
Army Service Centre ( North )

10. Rashtriya Indian Military College Dehradun ( Uttarakhand ) ( RIMC )

56. Artillery Training Centre
157
Army Ordance Corps Centre 58.1 Electrical and Mechanical Engineer
11 Remount Training School and Depot Hempur ( Uttarakhand ) 12. High Altitude Warfare School ( HAWS ) Gulmarg ( J & K ) 13 AC Centre & School ( ACCS ) 14. School of Artillery 15. College of Military Engineering ( CME ) Pune ( Maharashtra ) 16. Armed Forces Medical College ( AFMC ) Pune ( Maharashtra ) 17 Military Intelligence Training school Pune ( Maharashtra ) and Depot 18. Army School of Physical Training Pune ( Maharashtra ) ( ASPT ) 19. Institute of National Integration 20. Institute of Military Law 21. Army Sports Institute
Secunderabad ( Telangana )
Centre ,
Ahmednagar ( Maharashtra ) Devlali ( Maharashtra ) : 3
$ 59 .
Bengal Engineer Group and Centre Roorkee ( Uttarakhand )
Jat Regimental Centre 6 Rajput Regimental Centre @ apn62 Dogra Regimental Centre .
60 .
Bareilly ( U.P )
Fatehgarh ( UP )
Faizabad ( UP )

63. Sikh Light Infantry Regimental Centre Fatehgarh ( UP ) 64.39 Gorkha Training Centre 65.11 Gorkha Rifles Regimental Centre 66. Kumaon Regimental Centre 67 Garhwal Rifles Regimental Centre , 68.1 Signal Training Centre - 69 Grenadiers Regimental Centre ..
Varanasi ( UP ) Lucknow ( U.P ) Ranikhet ( Uttarakhand ) : Lansdowne ( Uttarakhand ) Jabalpur ( MP )
Pune ( Maharashtra ) Kamptee ( Maharashtra ) Pune ( Maharashtra )

22. Combat Army Aviation Training Nasik ( Maharashtra )
Jabalpur ( M.P )
School , Nasik Road Camp
70 .
Jammu & Kashmir Rifles Regimental Jabalpur ( M.P ) Centre .

23. Heavy Bridging Training Camp
Marve ( Maharashtra )
24 : Army Air Defence College ( AADC ) Gopalpur ( Odisha ) 25. Junior Leaders Wing , Infantry School Belgaum ( Karnataka )
71 Mahar Regimental Centre :
Sagar ( MP )

72.3 Electrical and Mechanical Engineer Bhopal ( M.P. ) Centre 2 Signal Training Centre 74 Madras Regimental Centre

26. Army Service Corps ( ASC )
Bangalore ( Karnataka )
27 CMP Centre & School
Bangalore ( Karnataka ) Belgaum ( Karnataka ) . Bangalore ( Karnataka )
Panji ( Goa )

28. Rashtriya Military School
Wellington ( Tamil Nadu ) Delhi Cantt . ( Delhi ) Danapur ( Bihar ) .

29. Rashtriya Military School
Rejputana Rifles Regimental Centre Bihar Regimental Centre 77 Assam Regimental Centre 78.58 Gorkha Training Centre Jammu & Kashmir Light Infantry Regimental Centre

30. Counter Insurgency and Jungle Vairengte ( Mizoram )
76 .
Warfare ( CIJW ) school¨ • 31 : Junior Leader's Academy .
Shillong ( Meghalaya )
Bareilly ( UP )

32. Army Medical Corps ( AMC ) Centre Lucknow ( UP )
Shilong ( Meghalaya ) Srinagar ( J & K )
& School

33. RVC Centre & School
Merrut Cantt . ( UP )
80 .
34 : Army Airborne Training School Agra ( UP ) 35 , Remount Training School and Depot . Saharanpur ( U.P ) 36. Electronic and Mechanical Engineer- Vadodara ( Gujarat ) ing ( EME ) School Military College of Electronic and Secunderabad ( Telangana ) Mechanical Engineering ( MCEME )
Headquarters Ladakh Scouts 14 Gorkha Training Centre :
Leh ( J & K )
Sabathu ( H.P )
Defence Security Corps Centre
Cannanore ( TN )
Gopalpur , ( Odisha )
Air Defence Artillery Centre
37 .
Defence Services Staff College ( DSSC ) Wellington ( TN )
College of Defence Management Secunderabad ( Telangana ) ( CDM )
38 .
Simulator Development Division , Secunderabad ( Telangana ) Trimulgherry
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. INS Dronacharya .
Kochi II ( Kerala ) .
Bengaluru ( Karnátakaj Bengaluru

4. Anti Submarine Warfare School , INS Kochi ( Kerala ) , Venduruthy , .. 5. Navigation and Direction School , INS Kochi ( Kerala ) Venduruthy 6. Signal School , INS Venduruthy
16 Communication Training Institute ( CTI ) Jalahalli ,
( Karnataka ) Jalahalli , Bengaluru ( Karnataka )
17 Electronic Training Institute ( ETI )
Kochi ( Kerala )
18 Mechanical Training Institute ( MTI ) Tambaram , Chennal ( TN ) 19 Electrical and Instrument Training Jalahalli , Bengaluru Institute ( E & ITI )

7. Naval Institute of Education and Train - Kochi ( Kerala ) ing Technology , INS Venduruthy 8. Indian Navy Physical Training School , Goa INS Mandovi
( Karnataka )
20 Workshop Training Institute ( WTI ) Tambaram , Chennai ( T.N ) 21 Mechanical Transport Training Institute Avadi Chennai ( TN ) ( MTTI ) 22 Air Force Administratine College
9 Diving School , INS Venduruthy
Kochi ( Kerala )
" Kochi ( Kerala )

10. School for Naval Airmen
Coimbatore ( TN )

11. Naval Institute of Institute of Aeronautical Kochi ( Kerala )
Technology
Defence Research Development Organisation ( DRDO )
12 : INS Satavahana
Visakhapatnam ( A.P )
Name of the Training : Institutes / Academies
Location

13. INS Agrani
Coimbatore ( T.N ) Odisha Lonavala ( Maharashtra )

1. Institute of Technology Management Mussoorie ( Uttarakhand ) ( ITM ) . Institute
2. Defence of Advanced Pune ( Maharashtra ) Technology ( DIAT ) Deemed University .
14 / INS Chilka
15 INS Shivaji
Lonavala ( Maharashtra )

16. NBCD School , INS Shivaji
Mumbai ( Maharashtra )

17. INS Hamla

3. Millitary Institute of Training ( MILIT ) Pune ( Maharashtra ) , DRDO Training Institute ( DTI ) Under Jodhpur ( Rajasthan ) ✓ Defence Laboratory Targeted Training Centre ( TTC ) Under Bengaluru ( Karnataka ) gas Turbine Research Establishment

18. Naval War College .
Goa
Jamnagar ( Gujarat ) Visakhapatnam ( A.P ) :

19. INS.Valsura ,

20. Shipwright School
Mumbai ( Maharashtrapna_ ( GTRE )

21. Institute of Naval Medicine
22 Naval Police and Regulating School , Goa .
( Source : PI.B , Govt . of India , MoD
INS Mandovi
DRDO

23. Naval School of Music , INS Kunjali Mumbai ( Maharashtra ) 24. Naval Special Warfare Training Cum Goa
The Defence Research and Development Organisation ( DRDO ) is the R & D wing of the Ministry of Defence : Its mission is to develop " cutting - edge - defence technologies and achieve self - reliance in criti- cal defence systems to equip the armed forces with state - of - the - art Source : BHARAT 2025 )
Tactical Centre

25. Centre for Leadership and Behavioural Kochi ( Kerala ) Studies , 20 , Seamanship School , INS Venduruthy Kochi ( kerala ) 27. Observer School
weaponary .

25. Foundation Day of Some States Jan. 21 Manipur ( 1972 ) , Meghalaya ( 1972 ) and Tripura ( 1972 )
Kochi ( Kerala )
28 : School for Naval Oceanography and Kochi ( Kerala ) Meteorology
Day
Uttar Pradesh ( 1950 ) Himachal Pradesh ( 1971 ) Mizoram ( 1987 ) and Arunachal Pradesh ( 1987 ) .
Jan. 24
Kochi ( Kerala )

29. Maritime Warfare Centre
Jan. 25

30. School of Advanced Undersea warfare Visakhapatnam ( A.P )
Feb. 20

31. School of Medical Assistants
Mumbai ( Maharashtra )
Bihar ( 1912 ) ( Bihar Diwas )
Mar. 22
Indian Air Force
Rajasthan Day ( 1949 )
Mar : 30
Narat of the Training Institutes / Academies
Location
Utkal ( Odisha ) Day ( 1939 )
Apr. 1
Gujarat ( 1960 ) and Maharashtra Day ( 1960 )
May 1
Sikkim Day ( 1975 )
Hyderabad ( Telangana ) Allahabad ( UP )

1. Air Force Academy , Dundigal .
2. Basic Flying Training School
May 16
Goa Statehood Day ( 1987 )
May 30
· Telangana Foundation Day ( 2014 )
June 2

3. Navigation Training School
Begumpet ( Telangana )
Chhattisgarh ( 2000 ) , Punjab ( 1966 ) , Haryana ( 1966 ) Madhya Pradesh ( 1956 ) , Karnataka ( 1956 ) , Kerala ( 1956 ) , Andhra Pradesh ( 1956 ) and Tamil Nadu Day ( 1956 ) . .. Uttaranchal ( Now Uttarakhand ) Day ( 2000 ) Jharkhand Day ( Jharkhand Diwas ) ( 2000 ) December 1 Nagaland Day ( 1963 )
Nov. 1
4 Air Force Station
Hakimpet ( Telangana )
Hakimpet ( Telangana ) :
Helicopter Training School
6 Fixed Wing Training Flying Yelahanka
Bengaluru ( Karnataka )
Nov. 9 .
Bidar ( Karnataka ) Bengaluru ( Karnataka )

7. Air Force Station
Nov. 15
112 Helicopter Unit , Yelahanka
Air Force Technical College , Jalahalli . Bengaluru ( Karnataka ) Basic Training Institute ( BTI ) ***** _ _Belgaum ( Karnataka )
N.B .: The accession of the state of Jammu and Kashmir to India was signed by Maharaja Hari Singh ( the erstwhile ru Join on Telegram @apna charmels
Non Technical

26. Research Centres of India
Ahmedabad : Mumbai Varanasi New Delhi
Indian Agricultural Research Institute
New Delhi
2 : Central Rice Research Institute
3. Sugarcane Breeding Institute
3. Central Potato Research Institute 15. Central Tobacco Research Institute 6. Central Forest Research Institute 7 : National Sugar Research Institutė
Shimla and Patna Rajahmundry Dehradun Kanpur
New Delhi .
56 Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Hyderabad
Diagnostics ( CDFD )
National Brain Research Centre Bharat Electronics Limited . 59 Indian Institute of Pulses Research
Gurugram
§ . Indian Institute of Natural Resins and Gums Rarichi ( earlier it was Indian Lac Research Institute ) 9. National Dairy Research Institute
Jalahalli , Bengaluru Kanpur
Karnal
60 Central Water and Power Research Station Kharagwasala , Pune 61. Indian Institute of Sugar cane Research Lucknow

30. Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research Dhanbad 11. Central Leather Research Institute . 12. Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Chennai Patna

27.Nuclear And Space Research Centres in India
= >
Lucknow Pune . Bengaluru

13. Central Drug Research Institute 14. Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorolgy 15. Raman Research Institute

1. India Rare Earths Limited
2. Uranium Corporation of India 3 Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC )
Aluva ( Kerala ) Jadugoda
| Mumbai -

16. Central Scientific Instruments Organisation Chandigarh 17. National Metallurgical Laboratory : Jamshedpur 18. Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Bhavnagar Institute 19. Archaeological Survey of India , Indian Museum Kolkata 20. Central Jute Technology Research Institute Burdwan / Kolkata 21. Central Plantation Crops Research Institute : Kasargod ; Kerala 22. Textile Industrial Research Institute
4 Electronics Corporation of India
Hyderabad :
5 Bhabha Atomic Research Centre ( BARC ) Trombay ( Mumbai ) 6 Radio Astronomy Centre .
Udhagamandalam
( Ooty ) Kolkata Hyderabad

7. Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics :

8. Nuclear Fuel Complex .

9. National Centre for Earth Science studies Thiruvananthpuram :
( Kerala ) .⠀ Ahmedabad Bangalore / Bengaluru Thiruvananthpuram
10 Physical Research Laboratory , 11. Department of Space 12. Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre
Ahmedabad

23. All India Institute of Medical Sciences ( AIIMS ) New Delhi 24. National Aerospace Laboratory 25. National Institute of Oceanography 25 : National Geophysical Research Institute 27. Indian Institute of Petroleum 28. Central Building Research Institute
Bengaluru
Dona Paula , Goa @ apha_Space Application Centre Hyderabad 13. Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO ) Bangalore Ahmedabad

15. Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Thumba ( Kerala ) ☐ Station 16. Indian Scientific Satellite Project Bengaluru ( Bangalore ) 17 College of Satellite Communication Ahmedabad ,
Dehradun
Roorkee

29. Central Road Research Institute :
New Delhi

30. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research . 31. High Altitude Research Laboratory 32. National Botanical Research Institute
Technology
Mumbai .
Kolkata ,
18 Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics
Gulmarg
Lucknow

28. Health and Medicinal Research Centres in India All India Malaria Research Institute National Tuberculosis Institute

33. Central Food Technological Research Institute Mysuru ( Mysore ) 34. Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute Kolkata 35. National Enviornmental ** Research Institute
New Delhi Bangalore Mumbal
Engineering Nagpur
Indian Cancer Research Centre
Mukteshwar ( HP ) Izzamnagar ( UP . )
Indian Veterinary Research Institute

36. Central Electro - Chemical Research Institute Karaikudi 37. Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
Kolkata
Institute of Ayurvedic Studies and Research Jamnagar ( Gujarat ) Vallabh Bhai Patel Chest Institute :

38. Industrial Toxicology Research Centre .. Lucknow 39. Central Mechanical Engineering Research Durgapur Institute 10. Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology Hyderabad 11 India Meteorological Department
Delhi
Mumbai
Haffkine Institute
National Institute of Communicable Diseases Delhi
School of Tropical Medicine
Kolkata
New Delhi
Central Leprosy Training and Research Institute Chengalpattu

12. National Institute of Immunology
Chandigarh
New Delhi Nashik Alappuzha
P.G .. Medical Education and Research :

13. India Security Press
Hyderabad
National Institute of Nutrition National Institute of Occupational Health King Institute of Preventive Medicine

14. Central Coir Research Institute
Ahmedabad

15. National Coir Research & Management Thiruvanantha Institute
Guindy ( Chennai )
All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health Kolkata IndianCouncilofMedical Research ( ICMR ) Institutes National JALMA Institute for Leprosy & Other Mycobacterial Diseases ( NJILOMD ) , Agra Natioanl Institute of Occupational Health ( NIOH ) Ahmedabad ICMR - National Institute of Traditional Medicine , Belagavi Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Duram
16 : National Institute for the Empowerment of Dehradun Persons with Visual Disabilities ( Divyangian ) 7. Centre for Ecological Sciences .
Bengaluru
18 Indian Institute for Ecology and Environment New Delhi 19. Survey of India 10 Institute of Microbial Technology
Dehradun Chandigarh

31. Important Classical Dances And Artists
Lavani , Nakata , Kol , Lezin ; Gara , Iranikąja Dasavtar or Bohada , Tamasha , Mauni Povadas , Powara , Gouricha , Lalita etc. Yakshagan , Huttari , Veeragase , Suggi , Kunitha , Karga , Lambi , Ummatt - aat ( Coorg ) : Garba , Dandiya Ras , Lasya , Panihari , Tippani Jüriun , Bhavai Bhangra , Giddha , Daff , Dhaman etc. Gair , Ghumar , Chakri , Ganagor , Jhulan Leela , Jhuma , Suisini , Ghapal , Panihari , Ginad etc. Khanafm , Pakhupila , Cherokan etc. Jammu & Kashmir Rauf , Hikat , Mandjas , Kud , Dandi nach , Damali , Tamil Nadu Bharatnatyam , Kumi , Kolattam , Kavadi , Telangana
Maharashtra
Dance Artists Bharatnatyam Yamini Krishnamurthy , Sonal Man Singh , Rukmini Devi Arundale , T Balasaraswati , Padma Subrahmanyam , S.K. Saroj , Rama Gopal , Leela Samson , Mrinalini Vikram Sarabhai , Vijayanthimalá Bali , MalvikaSarkar , Priyadarshini Govind , Hema Malini , vétc . ” :
Karnataka
Gujarat
Punjab
Krishnamurthy , Vedantam , Satyanarayan Sarma , Lakshminarayan Shashtri , Radha Reddy , Raja Reddy , Swapnasundari , Vempati Chinna Satyam etc. Sanjukta Panigrahi , Sonal Man Singh , Kiran Segal , Madhavi Mudgal , Kali Charan Patnaik , Indrani Rahman , Sharon Lowen , Myrta Barvie ( Argentine ) Monan Mahapatra , Renowned Teachers Kelucharan Mahapatra , Pankaj Charan Das , Harekrishna Behra , Mayadhar Raut etc.
2 Kuchipudi Yamini
Rajasthan
Mizoram
Odissi
Perini Sivalandavam Dappu Nrityam , Lambadi , Oggu Katha , Chindu Bhagavatam Gussadi , Tholu Bommalata Nautanki , Raslila , Jadda , Kajri , Thora ; Chappeli Jaita . Jata - Jatin , Jhijhiya , Bakho - Bakhain , Panwariya , Sama - Chakwa , Bidesia ; Karia Jhummer , Jatra
Vallthol Narayania Menon , Uday Shankar , K Krishnan Nair , Shanta Rao , Mrinalini Sarabhai , Anand Sivaraman , Krishnankutty etc. Birju Maharaj , Lacchu Maharaj , Sukhdev Maharaj , Sitara Devi , Gopi Krishna , Shovana Narayan , MalvikaSarkar , Chandralekha , Bindadin Maharaj , Acchan Maharaj , Narayan Prasad . Guru Amli Singh , Atamb Singh , Nalkumar Singh , Jhaveri Sisters ( Darshana , Nayana , Suwama , Ranjana Jhaveri ) , Savita Mehta , Kalawati Devi , Charu Mathur , Sonarik Singh , Gopal Singh , Bimbavati Devi etc. Mohiniattam K. Kalyankutty Amma , Bharati Shivaji , Ragini Devi , Sri Devi , Shanta Rao , Tara Nidigadi , Geeta Gayak etc.
Uttar Pradesh
Kathakali
Bihar

5.Ktthak
etc ..
Jhumar , Phag Dance , Daph , Dhamal , Loor , Gugga , Khor , Cagor etc. > Karnatakmusic , also spelled Karnatic or Carnatic , music of southern India that evolved from ancient Hindu . traditions . This form of music evolved in Tamil Nadu . Renowned composers : Tyagaraja , Shyama Shashtri , Muthuswami Dikshitar . Lava is a populular folk dance of Minicoy island
Haryana

6. Manipuri

32. States and their Folk Dances

33. Cultural Organisations in India Organisation
Jharkhand
Chhau , Sarahul , Jat - Jatin , Karma , Danga , Bidesia , Sohrai , Paika , Bheja Gadhwali , Kumayuni , Chachari , Kajari , Jhora , Raslila , Chappeli , Bhotia Goudi , Karma , Pandwani , Jhumar , Pali , Tapali , Navrani , Diwari , Mundari . Andhra Pradesh Kuchipudi ( Classical ) ,
Establishment Year :
1 The Asiatic Society
1784
Uttarakhand
2 The Archaeological Survey of India
3. National Archives of India
1861
1891
Chhattisgarh
44 , Central Secretariate Library
1891

5. Anthropological Survey of India
1915
Ghantamardala ,

6. National Library ( Kolkata )
1948
Ottam Thedal , Mohiniattam , " Kummi , Siddhi Madhuri , Chhadi . Arunachal Pradesh Ponung , Mask dance ( Mukhauta : Nritya ) , Tapu , War dance , Delong , Yakjong ,

7. Sangeet Natak Akademi 8. Lalit Kala Akademi 9. Sahitya Akademi
1953
1954
1954 :
Himachal Pradesh Jhora , Jhali , Chharhi , Dhaman , Chhapeli , Mahasu , Nati , Dangi , Chamba , Thali , Jhainta , Daf , Stick dance etc.

10. National School of Drama ( an independent entity from 1975 ) 11. Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 1985
1959
Mandi ; Jhagor , Khol , Dakni etc. Bihu , Bichhua , Natpuja , Maharas , Kaligopal , Bagurumba ; Naga dance , Khel Gopal , Tabal Chongli , Canoe , Jhumura Hobjanai Ojapali Sattriya etc. Kathi , Gambhira , Dhali , Jatra , Baul , Marasia , Mahal , Keertan etc. Kathakali ( Classical ) , Ottam Thulal Mohini - attam , Kummattikali ( Mask dance ) , Kaikoitikali , Tappatikali , Kali Auttam . Laho , Bangla etc.
Goa Assam

34. Places Associated with Eminent Persons ( World )
Person
Napoleon Bonaparte , Gautam Buddha Alexander - the Great Dr. Rajendra Prasad : General Dyer
Corsica Kapilavastu Macedonia Ziradei Jallianwala Bagh Anand Bhawan Chittor Haldi Ghati Sabarmati Sitab Diara Shantiniketan Belur Math
West Bengal
Kerala
Jawaharlal Nehru
Meghalaya
Maharana Pratap
Manipuri ( Classical ) , Rakhal , Nat Rash , Maha Rash , Raukhat Thabal Chongba etc.
Maharana Pratap
Manipur
Mahatma Gandhi
Jai Prakash Narayan Rabindra Nath Tagore Rama Krishna Paramhans
Chong , Khaiva , Lim , Nuralim etc ,
Nagaland
Odissi ( Classical ) , Savarl , Ghumara , Painka Munarl , Chhau , Chadya Dandanata etc.
Orlega
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

35. Crematorium of Famous Persons ( India )
Mahatma Gandhi
Raj Ghat
T. Prakasam Bhagat Singh Chittaranjan Das C.F. Andrews Bal Gangadhar Tilak Jayaprakash Narayan Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Jawaharlal Nehru . Lal Bahadur Shastri M.S. Golvalkar Major General Rajinder Singh Lata Mangeshkar P.T. Usha Mother Teresa Vallabhbhai Patel Chandra Shekhar : George Bernard Shaw Yatindra Mohan Sengupta K.V. Puttappa Napoleon Bonaparte Geoffery Chaucer
Lal Bahadur Shastri
Vijay Ghat
Ch . Charan Singh
Kishan Ghat
Rajiv Gandhi
Veer Bhoomi
Giani Zail Singh , Chandra Shekhar
Lokmanya
Ekta Sthal ,
KR . Narayanan
Loknayak
Uday Bhoomi . Shanti Van Shakti Sthal Abhay Ghat Samata Sthal Karma Bhumi Mahaprayan Ghat
Jawahar Lal Nehru
Bangabandhu Chacha
Indira Gandhi
@ apna_¡Guruji -Man of Peace
Morarji Desai
Jagjeevan Ram Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma Dr. Rajendra Prasad Guljari Lal Nanda Ambedkar
Sparrow Swar Kokila Udanpari
Narayan Ghat
Mother : Pure Heart .
BR .
Chaitra Bhoomi
Sardar Young Turk
Atal Bihari Vajpayee
Sadaiv Atal

36. Famous Nicknames of Eminent Persons
G.B.S Deshpriya Kuvempu
Person
Nickname
Mahatma Gandhi
Father of the Nation ; Bapu
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Frontier Gandhi ; Badshah Khan
Little Corporal ; Man of Destiny Father of English Poetry
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
Iron Man of India .
Baba Saheb Father of Indian Dr.
B. R. Ambedkar
Subhash Chandra Bose Ho Chi Minh
Netaji
Constitution
Uncle Ho
Sheikh Abdullah
Sher - e - Kashmir
Samudra Gupta
Pearl Buck
Napoleon of India .
Li - Kwan
Mahakavi Kalidas
Shakespeare of India
Grand Old Man of British Politics Willium E. Gladstone
Chanakya
Machiavelli of India
Gen. Ervin Rommel Md . Ali Jinnah Sunil Gavaskar / Sachin Tendul C.N. Annadurai William Shakespeare : Clive Lloyd
Desert Fox
Akbar of Kashmir
Jainul Abdin
Quaid - i - Azam
Vishwa Kavi ; Kaviguru ; Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore
Little Master
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari
Rajaji / CR
Anna
Dr. Srikrishna Singh
Bihar Kesari
Bard of Avon Supercat
Ashutosh Mukherji
Bengal Kesari
$ Punjab Kesari
Lala Lajpat Rai Dr. Rajendra Prasad . Ravi Sankar Maharaj Chaudhury Devi Lal Earl of Warwick Sarojini Naidu Florence Nightingale
Mohammad - Bin - Tuglaq . Annie Besant Kazi Nazrul Islam Anugrah Narayan Singh Jamna Lal Bajaj Mother Teresa
Mix of Opposite Traits * Mata Vasant
Desh Ratna ; Ajatshatru Father of Gujarat Tau King Maker Nightingale of India Lady with the lamp
Rebel Poet : Bihar Vibhuti
Fifth Son of Mahatama Gandhi , Pure Heart
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

37. Some Great Works of Famous Persons :
Bharat Ratna
Bharat Ratna : The highest - civilian award is given for exceptional service the advancement of art , literature and science , and in recognition of public service of the highest order . The decoration is in the form of a peepal leaf , about : 5.8 cm long , 4.7 cm wide and 3.1 mm thick . It is of toned bronze . On its obverse is embossed a replica of the sun , 1.6 cm in diameter , below which the words " Bharat Ratna " are embossed in Hindi . On the reverse are State Temblem and the motto , also in Hindi . The emblem , the sun and the rim are of platinum . The inscriptions are in burnished bronze : The first three recipients of Bharat Ratna were Dr. S. Radhakrishnan ,
C. Rajagopalachari and Dr.C.V.Raman in 1954 while Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan was the first : foreigner to be honoured with this award in 1987 . Recipients of Bharat Kaini . 1954 Chakravarti Rajagopalachari , Dr.Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan , Dr. Chandrasekhar Venkat Raman 1955 : Dr. Bhagwan Das , Dr. Mokshagundam . Visvesvaraiya , Pt . Jawaharlal Nehru .
Henery Dunant and Gustave Moynier Baden Powell Garibaldi Karl Marx

1. Foundation of Red Cross

2. Foundation of Scout
3. Foundation of Red Gaurds
4. Founder of Socialism 5. Founder of Socialist Party , 6. Father of Sanskrit Grammar 7. Founder of Anand Van
Acharya Narendra Dev Panini Baba Amte

8. Founder of ' Auroville Ashram ' Aurobindo Ghosh
( Puducherry ) 9. Founder of Shantiniketan 10. Founder of Vishwabharati 11 : Founder of Paunar Ashram 12. Founder of Bhudan Movement 13. Founder of League of Nations 14. Founder of Golden Temple 15. Founder of Khalsa Panth
Rabindra Nath Tagore Rabindra Nath Tagore Vinoba Bhave Vinoba Bhave Woodrow Wilson Guru Arjun Dev Guru Gobind Singh 38. Awards and Honours
⠀⠀⠀ Award / Prize Nobel Prize
Field
Peace , Literature , Medicine , Physics , Chemistry , ( From 1901 ) and Economics ✓ ( From 1969 ) . Journalism ( From 1917 ) Film ( From 1929 ) Science ( From 1952 ) Literature ( From 1969 ) Music ( From 1958 ) ⠀⠀
1957 Pt . Govind Ballabh Pant 1958 Dr. Dhondo Keshave Karve 1961 Dr. Bidhan Chandra ( BC ) Roy , Rajarshi Purushottam Das Tandon
Pulitzer Prize
Academy ( Oscar ) Awards Kalinga Award The Man Booker Prize Grammy Award Ramon Magasaysay Award .
1962 Dr. Rajendra Prasad
1963 Dr. Pandurang Vaman ( P. V. ) Kane , Dr. Zakir Hussain @ a1966 Lal Bahadur Shastri ( Posthumous ) .
@apna
1972 Mrs. Indira Gandhi 1975 Varahagiri Venkat ( V.V. ) Giri 1976 Kumaraswami ( K. ) Kamraj ( Posthumous ) 1980 Mary Bojaxhiu Teresa ( Mother Teresa ) . 1983 Acharya Vinoba Bhave ( Posthumous ) 1987 Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan 1988 Marudur Gopalan ( MG ) Ramachandran ( Posthumous ) 1990 Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar ( Posthumous ) , Dr. Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela 1991 Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel ( Posthumous ) , Morarji Ranchhodji Desai , Rajiv Gandhi ( Fosthumous ) Maulana Abul Kalam Azad ( Posthumous ) , Jehangir Ratanji Dadabhai ( J.R.D. ) Tata , Satyajit Ray ( Posthumous ) 1997 Dr. Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen ( A.P.J. ) Abdul Kalam , Guljarilal Nanda ( Posthumous ) , Aruna Asaf Ali ( Posthumous ) : 1998 Chidambaram ( C ) Subramaniam , Madurai Sanmukhavadivu ( MS ) Subbulakshmi , 1999 Ft . Ravi Shankar , Prof Amartya Sen , Gopinath Bordoloi ( Posthumous ) and Loknayak Jay Prakash Narayan ( Posthumous ) 2001 Lata Dinanath Mangeshkar , Ustad Bismillah Khan 2009 Pt . Bhimsen Gururaj Joshi : 2014 : Próf . C.N.R. Rao , Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar ( 1st player and the youngest one to get ' Bhart Ratna ' ) - 2015 Pandit Madan Mohan , Malviya ( Posthumous ) , Atal Bihari Vajpayee 2019 Pranab Mukherjee , Nanaji Dheshmukh ( Posthumous ) , Bhupen Hazarika ( Posthumous ) : 2023 PV . Narsimha Rao ( Posthumous ) , Chaudhary Charan Singh ( Posthumous ) , Dr. MS . Swaminathan ( Pasthumous ) L Advani , Karpoori Thakur ( Posthumous ) Join on Telegram @apna_channels
Government ( Public ) Service , Social Service , Journalism , Literature , Communication and International Understanding ( From 1957 ) For outstanding contributions in the field of Art / Literature / Science , and Public Service :
Bharat Ratna ' :
Dada Saheb Phalke Award Film ( From 1969 ) - Jnanpith Award Saraswati Samman Vachaspati Samman Shankar Award
Literature ( From 1965 )
Literature ( From 1991 ) Sanskrit Literature ( From 1992 ) Indian Philosophy , Culture and Art Literature Socio communal Harmony Sports Coaching / Training ( From 1985 ) . Sports ( From 1961 ) . : Science ( From 1957 ) * Medical Science ( From 1971 ) Agriculture ( From 1972 ) Medical 39. Padma Awards
Vyasa Samman Kabir Samman . Dronacharya Award … . Arjuna Award Bhatnagar Award Dhanwantari Award Borlaug Award Dr. B.C. Roy Award
Republic Day Awards : Bharat Ratna , Padma Vibhushanand Padma Shree are given for exceptional service towards the advancement of Art , Literature and Science and in recognition of public service of a high ( or the highest ) order . : Param Vir Chakra : It is the highest Gallantry Award . It is given for extraordinary act of bravery in the field of Naval , Air and Army , Mahavir Chakra : It is the second highest Gallantry Award . : Vir Chakra It is the third highest Gallantry Award

40. Gallantry Awards
Param Vir Chakra : The highest decoration for valour is the Param Vir Chakra which is awarded for the most conspicuous bravery or some daring or pre - eminent act of valour or self - sacrifice in the presence of the enemy , whether on land , at sea or in the air . The decoration is made of bronze and is circularin shape . It has , on the obverse , four replicas of " Indra's Vajra embossed round the State emblem in the centre . On the reverse the words " Param Vir Chakra " are embossed : both in Hindi and English with two lotus flowers in the etc. ) Join on Telegram @apna_channels

41. Recipients of the Bharatiya Jnanpith Award The first Jnanpith Award was given in 1965. It carries a citation , shawl , shrifal , a bronze idol of Vagdevi Saraswati and a cash prize of 21 lakh .
Year
Recipient
Work
Odakkuzhal ( Malayalam ) Ganadevata ( Bengali )
1965 G. Sankara Kurup 2nd 1966 Tara Shankar .. Bandyopadhyay 3rd 1967 K.VPutappa , Shankar Joshi 1968 Sumitra Nandan Pant
1st
Uma Ramayan Darshananı ( Kannada ) , Nisheeth ( Gujarati ) . 6. Chidambara ( Hindi ) ,
5 1969 Prof. Raghupati Sahay Gul - e - Naghma ( Urdu )
Firaq Gorakhpuri 1970 Vishwanath Satyanarayana 71971 Vishnu Dey 8h 1972 Ramdhari Singh Dinkar 9th 1973 Gopinath Mohanty ,
Shreemad Ramayan Kalpavriksham ( Telugu ) Smriti Satta Bhavishya ( Bengali ) Urvashi ( Hindi ) Mati Matal ( Oriya ) . Naku Thanthi ( Kannada ) Yayati ( Marathi ) Chittirappavai ( Tamil ) Pratham Pratishruti ( Bengali ) Mukajiya Kanasugalu ( Kannada )
D.R Bendre
1974 Vishnu Sakharam Khandekar 11 1975 P.V. Akilandam 12th 1976 Smt . Ashapurna Devi Pha3th 1977 Dr.K. Shivram Karanth
Ashok Chakra Ashok Chakra is the country's highest peacetime gallantry award equivalent to Param Vir Chakra . The Chakra is made of gilt gold and is circular in shape . Embossed on the obsverse is a replica of Ashok Chakra surrounded by a lotus wreath . Along the edge is pattern of lotus leaves , flowers and buds . On the reverse , the words " Ashok Chakra " are embossed both in Hindi and English , with lotus flowers in the intervening space . The Chakra is worn on the left breast with a green silk . riband , about 3.2 cm in width and divided into two equal segments by an orange vertical line . Kirti Chakra : The decoration is awarded for conspicuous gallantry . It is made of standard silver and is circular in shape . The obverse and the reverse are exactly the same as in Ashok Chakra . The Chakra is worn on the left breast with a green silk riband , about 3.2 cm in width and divided equally into two by orange vertical lines . Shaurya Chakra : The decoration is awarded for an act of gallantry . It is exactly like Ashok Chakra , except that it is made of bronze . The Chakra is worn on the left breast with a green silk riband , about 3.2 cm in width and divided into four equal segments by three orange vertical lines . Param Vishisht Seva Medal ( PVSM ) , Ati Vishisht Seva Medal ( AVSM ) , Vishisht Seva Medal ( VSM ) : The Vishist Seva Medals are awarded to personnel of all the three services in recognition of distinguished service of the " most exceptional " , " exceptional " and " high " order respectively . Param Vishisht Seva Medal is made of gold , Ati Vishisht Seva Medal of standard silver and Vishisht Seva Medal of bronze , all circular in shape and 3.5 cm in diameter . Each
14th 1978 Dr Sachidananda Hiranand Kitni Nawon Mein Kitni Bar Vatsyayana Agyeya " ( Hindi ) » --
Kumar Mrityunjay ( Assamia )
15th 1979 Dr. Virendra Bhattacharya 16 1980 SK Pottekat ,
Oru Dishatinte Katha . ( Malayalam ) Kagaz te Canvas ( Punjabi ) Yama ( Hindi )
17h 1981 Amrita Pritam 18th 1982 Mahadevi Verma 19th 1983 Masti Venkatesh Iyengar 20th 1984 T. Shiv Shankar Pillai 21 1985 Pannalal Patel :
Chikaveer Rajendra ( Kannada ) Kayar ( Malayalam ) Manvini Bhavai ( Gujarati ) . Oriya Literature
1986 Sachida Nanda Routroy
23 1987 Vishnu VamanShirwadkar Marathi Literature 24th 1988 Dr.
C. Narayana Reddy Telugu Literature 25th 1989 Qurtul - ain - Hyder Urdu Literature 26th 1990 Prof. Vinayak Krishna Kannada Literature Gokak 27 1991 Subhash Mukhopadhu Bengali Literature :
28th 1992 Naresh Mehta 29 1993 Dr. Sitakant Mahapatra 30 1994 Prof.U.R.Ananthamurthy 31ª . 1995 M.T. Vasudevan Nair 1996 Mrs. Mahashweta Devi
Hindi Literature Oriya Literature Kannada Literature Malayalam Literature Bengali Literature 1 Urdu Literature Kannada Literature
133
1997 Ali Sardar Jafri
34 1998 Girish Karnad
35h 1999 Nirmal Verma , Gurdayál Hindi Literature
Punjabi
Literature . Assamese Literature
Singh
2000 Dr Indira Goswa
Join on Telegram @apna channels

42. Recipients of Dada Saheb Phalke Award Phalke award carries a ' Swarna Kamal ' ( Golden Lotus ) , a shawl and a cash prize of Rs . 10 lakh .
should award the prizes . From Stockholm , the Royal .. Swedish Academy of Sciences confers the prizes for physics , chemistry and economics , the Karolinska Institute confers the prize for physiology or medicine , and the Swedish Academy confers the prize for literature . The Norwegian Nobel Committee based in Oslo confers the prize for peace . > The Nobel Foundation is the legal owner and functional administrator of the funds and serves as the joint administrative body of the prize - awarding institutions , but it is not concerned with the prize deliberations or decisions , which rest exclusively with the four institutions . The Selection Process : Although the winners are announced in October and November , the selection process begins in the early autumn of the preceding year , when the prize - awarding institutions invite more than 6,000 individuals to propose , or nominate , candidates for the prizes . During September and early October the Nobel Committees accomplish their work and submit their recommendations to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the other prize - awarding institutions , Though the final decision by the awarders must be made by November 15 , the prizes are distributed every year on 10th December , the death anniversary of Alfred Nobel . Prizes may be given only to individuals , except the Peace Prize , which may also be conferred upon an institution : Join on Telegram @apna channels
Introduced in 1969 , the Dada Saheb Phalke award was first given to actress Devika Rani .
Year Year
Recipient
Year
Recipient
1969 Devika Rani Roerich 1971 Prithvi Raj Kapoor _ ( Posthumously ) 1973. Sulochana ( Rubi Myers )
1970 Birendra Nath Sircar 1972 Pankaj Mallick ,
1974 Bommireddy Narsimha * Reddy ( B.N. Reddy ) 1976 Kanan Devi 1978 Ray Chandra ( R.C. ) Boral : 1980 Paidi Jairaj ( P. Jairaj ) * 1982 L.V. Prasad . 1984 Satyajit Ray 1985
B. Nagi Reddi 1988 Ashok Kumar 1990 Akkineni Nageshwar Rao 1992 Dr. Bhupen Hazarika
1975 Dhiren Ganguli 1977 Nitin Bose 1979 Sohrab Modi 1981 Naushad Ali 1983 Durga Khote 1985 ; V. Shantaram 1987 Raj Kapoor 1989 Lata Mangeshkar 1991 Bhalji ( Bhalchandra ☐ Govind ) Pendharkar 1993 Majrooh Sultanpuri 1995 Dr. Rajkumar 1997 Kavi Pradeep 1999 Hrishikesh Mukherjee 2001 Yash Chopra 2003 Mrinal Sen
1994 Dilip Kumar 1996 Sivaji Ganesan 1998 B.R.Chopra 2000 Asha Bhonsle 2002 Dev Anand 2001 Adoor Gopalkrishnan

45. Grammy Award ( American Music Award ) > Grammy Award , any of a series of awards presented annually in the United States by the National Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences ( NARAS ; commonly called the Recording Academy ) or the Latin Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences ( LARAS ; commonly called the Latin Recording Academy ) to recognize achievement in the music industry .
1. The famous Sitar maestro a reputed name in Hindustani Classical Music Pt . Ravi Shankar received Grammy Award for the first time , in 1967 for " West Meets East " in " Best Chamber Music Performance " Category . > Winners are selected from more than 25 fields and in total more than 75 awards are presented . The honourees receive a golden statuette of a gramophone . The Grammy Awards were first presented by NARAS in Los Angeles in 1959 , when 28 prizes were given . Winners included Ella Fitzgerald , Frank Sinatra and the Kingston Trio . > The number of awards has increased as musical genres have emerged . Rock was first recognized as a genre by the academy at the 1980 ceremony and rap at the 1989 presentation . An award for best music video was first handed out in 1982 to acknowledge the growing
Famous Music Director A.R. Rehman received Oscapna_kiranence of the medium . for " Best Original Score " and jointly received the award with Gulzar for " Best Original Song " in " Slumdog Millionaire " ( Director : Danney Boyle ) in 2009 . Resul Pookutty received the Academy Award in 2009 for " Best Sound Mixing " in the film ' Slumdog Millionaire ' . The song Naatu Naatu from the hit Telugu - language historical action - drama epic RRR , directed by SS Rajamouli has made history by becoming the first Indian film song to win an Oscar . The blockbuster track by M.M. Keeravani won Best Original Song at the 95th Academy Awards , beating heavyweights like Lady Gaga and Rihanna . Lyrics of this song is written by Chandrabose , recorded by Rahul Sipligunj and Kaala Bhairava and choreographed by Prem Rakshit and the hook step is filmed on N.T. Ramarao Jr. and Ramcharan Teja . Earlier this year ( 2023 ) this song won the Golden Globe Award in the same category . The Elephant Whisperers is a documentary , directed by Kartiki Gonsalves , won the Oscar in 2023. The documentary , produced by Guneet Monga , shows how _two abandoned elephants and their keepers form an unbreakable bond . List of All Oscar Awards Won By India
In 2011 NARAS radically restructured the Grammy category system and reduced the total number of awards from 109 to 78. Gender - based categories were eliminated , as were those that distinguished between solo and group efforts . Awards recognizing genres such as Hawaiian music , Native American music , and zydecowere folded into a si..gle category , dubbed " regional roots music , " and instrumental categories were drastically scaled back .
Pt . Ravi Shankar
He was the first Indian to win Grammy Awards . He was nominated 10 times and won 4 Grammy Awards in 1967 , 1972 , 2001 and 2012 respectively .
* He is the Indian with maximum number of Grammy Awards ( 4 Grammy +1 Life time Achievement Award in 2013 Total 5 awards from Grammy ) . Category GRAMMY Award for It . Ravi Shankar
Year Annual
For the Album
Category
GRAMMY
Bhanu Athaiya ( 1982 )
Award
Satyajit Ray ( 1992 )
10th
Best Chamber .
1967
West Meets East
Resul Pookutty ( 2009 )
Music Performance .
Gulzar ( 2009 )
for
Album of The Year
1972
15th
The Concert Bangladesh
A. R. Rahman ( 2009 )
Kartiki Gonsalves , and Guneet Monga , The Elephant Whisperers ( 2023 ) .
Full Circle - Carnegic Hall 2000
41th
Best World Music Album
2001
2013 56th Lifetime Achievement
M.M. Keeravani for composing Naatu Naatu
song - RRR ( 2023 ) :
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

7. Banu Mushtaq and Deepa Bhasthi-
Booker Prize , in full Man Booker Prize , formerly Booker McConnell Prize , prestigious British award given annually to a full - length novel in English . Booker McConnell , a multinational company , established the award in
In 1969 and 1970 the prize was awarded to a novel published in the year previous to that in which the prize was given . In 1971 the prize was awarded to a novel published that same year , between Januarý and November . Because the rule change precluded eligibility for novels published in 1970 , the one - off Lost Man Booker Prize was devised in 2010 to honour . such a novel . The winner , decided by public vote ; was Troubles by J.G. Farrell . Geetanjali Shree has become the first indian writer to win International Booker Prize for an Indian Language Book Ret Samadhi ( Tomb of Sand ) . 47. Ramon Magsaysay Award The Ramon Magsaysay Award , Asia's premier prize and highest honour , celebrates greatness of spirit and
The Man
Bookor Frize
1968 to provide a counterpart to the Prix Goncourt in France . Initially , only English - language writers from the United Kingdom , the Republic of Ireland and the Commonwealth countries were eligible . In 2013 , however , it was announced that the prize would be open to English - language writers worldwide from 2014 . The prize was the subject of controversy on several ☐ occasions , and in 1984 Salman Rushdie , the winner of the prize in 1981 for his novel Midnight's Children , "
described the judging committee as " Killjoyces " and apna_ktransformative leadership in Asia . In " Anti - Prousts " after the committee chairman stated that he had not read the fiction of James Joyce and Marcel Proustand did not want to award the prize to writers like them .
the past five decades , the award has been bestowed on over three hundred outstanding men , women and organizations whose selfless service has offered their societies , Asia and the world successful solutions to some of the most intractable problems of human development . " The trustees of the Ramon Magsaysay Award Foundation annually select the awardees . Awardees are presented with a certificate and a medallion with an embossed image of Ramon Magsaysay facing right in profile . The award is presented to them in formal * ceremonies in Manila , Philippines on August 31st , the birth anniversary of the much - esteemed Philippine President whose ideals inspired the Award's Creation . in 1957 .
Rushdie won the Booker of Bookers [ 1993 ] and the Best of the Booker [ 2008 ] prizes when they were given in celebration of the prize's 25th and 40th anniversaries , respectively . The award was administered by the Book Trust until . 2002 , when oversight passed to the Man Group PLC , an investment management firm . Well - known recipients of the prize include V.S.Naipaul , Nadine Gordimer , Ruth Prawer Jhabvala , Iris Murdoch , J.M. Coetzee , A.S. Byatt , Kingsley Amis , Penelope Lively , Ben Okri , Michael Ondaatje , Ian McEwan , Peter Carey , Kiran Desai and Hilary Mantel . In 1992 the Booker Russian Novel Prize was set up to reward contemporary Russian authors , to stimulate wider knowledge of modern Russian fiction , and to encourage translation and publication of Russian fiction outside Russia . The Russian prize was disassociated from the other Bookers in 1999 , after which sponsorship . was provided by several Russian companies . The biennial Man Booker International Prize was established in 2005 as a lifetime achievement award . From 2016 it was awarded annually to the writer of a novel or short - story collection in English translation . The annual Man Asian Prize was established in 2007 ; the Man Group announced in 2012 that it was withdrawing
The awards were given in six categories , five of which were discontinued effectively in 2009. The categories are , Government Service ( 1958-2008 ) Public Service ( 1958–2008 ) : Community Leadership ( 1958-2008 ) Joumalism , Literature and Creative Communication Arts ( 1958-2008 ) Peace and International Understanding ( 1958-2008 ) Emergent Leadership ( 2001- )
. :
ויי .
Uncategorized ( 2009- )
Note : Since 2001 Ramon Magsaysay Award in the field of Emergant Leadership is given with the help of Ford Foundation . @apna_channels
of the prize .
its sponsJoin on Telegram @apna channels

48. Gandhi Peace Prize Gandhi Peace Prize , named after Mahatma Gandhi , shall be awarded annually by the Government of India from 1995 . ➤ The award is given to individuals and institutions for their contributions towards social , economic and political
and
1977 Community Leadership 1979 Community Leadership
Ela Ramesh Bhatt Mabelle Arole Rajanikant Arole Gour Kishore Gosh .
1979 Community Leadership 1981 Journalism , Literature and
Creative Communication Aapna_kiratransformation through non - violence and other
1981 Community Leadership 1982 Community Leadership 1982 Public Service 1982 Journalism , Literature and Creative Communication Arts Rasipuram Lakshman 1984 Journalism , Literature and
Pramod Karan Sethi Chandi Prasad Bhatt Manibhai Desai Arun Shourie
Gandhian methods .
> The award carries 1 Crore ( 10 million ) in cash , convertible in any currency in the world , a plaque and a citation . It is open to all persons regardless of nationality , race , creed or sex . A jury consisting of the Prime Minister of India , the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha , the Chief Justice of India and two other eminent persons decides the awardee each year .
Creative Communication Arts
1985 Public Service
Muralidhar Amte
1989 Public Service
Lakshmi Chand Jain
1991 Journalism , Literature and Creative Communication Arts * 1992 Journalism , Literature and Creative Communication Arts
KV . Subbanna .
Country
Name of the Gandhi Peace
Year
Prize Winner
Ravi Shankar .
1995 Dr. Julius K. Nyerere , former President of Tanzania Tanzania 1999 Baba Amte ( Murlidhar Devidas Amte ) .
Banoo Jehangir Coyaji Kiran Bedi Pandurang Athavale Tirunellai N. Seshan Maheshweta Devi
1993 Public Service 1994 Government Services : 1996 Community leadership 1996 Government Services
India
2000 Dr. Nelson Mandela and Grameen Bank of S.Africa ,
Bangladesh India
Bangladesh ( jointly )
2013 Chandi Prasad bhatt
1997 Journalism , Literature and Creative Communication Arts 2000 Peace and International Understanding 2000 Community Leadership 2001 Community Leadership 2002 Emergent Leadership 2003 Government Services 2003 Government Services
2014 ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 2015 Vivekananda Kendra , Kanyakumari
India
India
Jockin Arputham
Patra Foundation and International jointly
2016 Akshay
Sulabh India
Aruna Roy Rajendra Singh Sandeep Pandey James Michael Lyngdoh Shantha Sinha
India
2017 : Ekal Abhiyan Trust
2018 Shri Yohei Sasakawa ( Chairman , the Nippon Japan
Foundation )
2019 ( Late ) H.M. Sultan Qaboos Bin Said Al Said : 2020 Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman 2021 Gita Press ; Gorakhpur
Oman
Bangladesh India
Lakshminarayan Ramdas 2004 Peace and International
Understanding
V. Shantha
2005 Public Service
Ministry of
Join on Telegram @apna channelture , Govt . of India

49. UNESCO Kalinga Prize The Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science is anaward given by UNESCO for exceptional skill in presenting scientific ideas to lay people . It was created in 1952 , following a donation from Biju Patnaik , Founder President of the Kalinga Foundation Trust in India . The recipient of this annual award must have demonstrated - during a brilliant career as writer , editor , lecturer , film producer , radio / television programme director or presenter - talent in interpreting science and technology for the public . The recipient should have striven to emphasize the international importance of science and technology and the contribution they make to improving public welfare , enriching the cultural heritage of nations , and solving problems . facing humanity . Many past prize winners have been scientists , while others have been trained in journalism or have been educators or writers . ➤ The laureate is selected by the Director - General of * UNESCO upon the recommendation of a four - member jury designated by him . Three members of the jury from different countries of the world are designated on the basis of equitable geographical distribution and the fourth on the recommendation of the Kalinga Foundation Trust .
Year
Name
Country
1981 David Attenborough
Dennis Flanagan
USA Brazil
1982 Oswaldo Frota - Pessoa
Abdullah Al Muti Sharafuddin
1983
Bangladesh
France
1984 Yves Coppens
Igor Petryanov ( ru )
Russi
1985 Peter Medawar
Nicolal G. Basov
1986
Russia
David Suzuki
Canada
Venezuela Finland Egypt : Pakistan Romania India
Marcel Roche
1987
1988
Bjorn Kurten
1989
Saad Ahmed Shabaan
1990
Misbah - Ud - Din Shami
Radu Iftimovici
1991
Narender K. Sehgal
Jorge Flores Valdés ( es )
Mexico
1992
Peter Okebukola
Nigeria
1993
Plero Angela
Italy
1994
Nikolai N. Drozdov
Russia
1995
Julfeta Fierro Gossman ( es )
Mexico
Czech Republic
Jifi Grygar
1996
Jayant V. Narlikar
India
1997 Dorairajan Balasubramanian
India
Regina Paz Lopez
Philippines
1998
Ennio Candotti
Brazil
Marian Ewurama Addy
Ghana
1999
Emil Gabrielian :
Armenia
Kalinga Prize Laureates
2000
Ernst W. Hamburger
Brazil Italy
☐☐ Country .
Year Name
2001
Stefano Fantoni
1952 Louis de Broglie
France
2002
Marisela Salvatierra
Venezuela
1953 Julian Huxley
2003
Pervez Hoodbhoy
Pakistan
Waldemar Kaempffert
USA
1954
2004
Jean Audouze
France
1955 Augusto Pi Sunyer ( es ) ⠀
Venezuela
2005 Jeter Bertoletti ( pr )
Brazil :
1956 George Gamow
USA
2006
No awards due to change of UNESCO rules
Bertrand Russell
2008
1957
Karl von Frisch .
1958
Yash Pal
Germany
India
2009
: 1959
Jean Rostand ;
France
Trinh Xuan Thuận
USA Vietnam India
1960
Ritchie Calder ..
UK :
2010
Gokulananda Mohapatra 2011 René Raul Drucker Colin ( es )
Arthur
C. Clarke
1961
Mexico
Gerard Piel
1962
USA
2013
Prof. Xiangyi Li-
China
1963
Jagjit Singh ( writer )
India
2017
Erik Jacquemyn
Belgium
Warren Weaver
1964
USA
2019
Karl Kruszelnicki
Australia
( 1965
Eugene Rabinowitch .
USA
2021
Jean - Pierre Luminet
France .
Paul Couderc ( fr )
France
: 1966
$ 2023
Ana Maria Cetto :
Fred Hoyle
Mexico
1967
Gavin de Beer
1968
Source Kalinga Foundation Trust ]
Konrad Lorenz
1969
Austria

50. Important Books and Authors [ A ] Indian writers and their books :
1970
Margaret Mead .
USA
Pierre Auger ( fr )
1971
France
Writer
1972 Philip H. Abelson
USA
Books
Nigel Calder
Pt Vishnu Sharma
Panchatantra Mudra Rakshas
1973 No award
Vishakhadatta Raskhan
1974 José Reis
Brazil
Prem Vatika Narayan Pandit Ashtadhyayi
Luis Estrada Martinez ( es )
Mexico
Hitopdesh
1975
No award
Panini
1976
George Porter
Shudrak
Mrichhakatikam
Alexander Oparin
Russia
Raghuvansham ,
Kalidasa
Kumarsambhavam ,
1977 Fernand Seguin
Canada
Meghdootam , Abhigyanshakuntalam
1978 Hoimar von Ditfurth 1979 1980 Sergei Kapitza Aristides Bastidas
Germany
Kama Sutra
Vatsyayana Vigyanesliwa
Russia
Mitakshara
Venezuela
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

3. The Oath of Vayuput in on Telegram ' @apna channels

5. Tarapore Committee
Tax Structure Reforms To head Drafting Committee of National Education Policy To analyse the financial condition of the Regional Rural Banks in India . Company Law Reforms Fertilizers To financing Infrastructure through PPP Model . Pension Scheme for Unorganised . Sector- Review the Operations of Cash Credit System Venture Capital : To decide the appropriate level of reserves that the RBI should hold , Report on the working capital market infrastructure institutions ( MIIs ) . Banking Supervision .
Abid Hussain Committee ¨Dr . Kirti S. Parekh Committee V.S. Vyas Committee
KC . Chakrabarty Committee
Sugar Industry
Mahajan Committee Satyam Committee
J.J. Irani Committee Hanumant Rao Committee Deepak Parekh Committee
for drafting the new textile policy regarding scrapping of Handloom Reservation Act : Development of Handlooms 7th Pay Commission . Review of Income Tax Rebates System of Working Capital Financing by Banks Restructuring the Commercial Banks Establishment of NABARD Reforms relating to non - banking financial companies ( NFBCs ) Restructuring of weak public- sector banks Establishment of CBI Small Savings Establishment of the UGC
Meera Seth Committee Justice A.K. Mathur Commission Y. V. Reddy Tandon Committee .
Dave Committee ✨
Chore Committee .
S. N. Verma Committee
Chandrashekhar Committee
Shiv Raman Committee Shah Committee
Bimal Jalan Committee
S.P. Talwar Committee .
K. Santhanam R.V. Gupta Committee . Radhakrishna Commission
Basel Committee @apnaan Committee
Army Pay Scales
Abhijit Sen Committee Dr. S.A. Dave Committee :
Long Term Food Policy . Collective Schemes - SEBI
Prasad Panel N.N. Vohra Committee :
International Trade and Services Relations ( Nexus ) of Politicians with Criminals
Investment

52. Committees and Commissions Report Nov. 1957 .
Commission / Committee
Appointment :
Purpose Related to

1. Balwant Rai Mehta Committee Jan. 1957
To examine the working of the Community Development Programme ( 1952 ) and the National Extension service ( 1953 ) and to suggest measures for the better working . To examine all aspects of the educational sector in India , to evolve a general pattern of education and to advise guidelines and policies for the development of education in India . The committee on constitutional ammendment Panchayati Raj Bombay Communal Riots Anti Sikh Riot

2. Kothari Commission / Indian 14 July 1964 29 June 1966 Education Commission

3. Swarn Singh Committee
4. Ashok Mehta Committee . 5. Srikrishna Commission 6. Nanavati Commission
Aug. 1978
May 2000

7. Nanavati - Mehta Commission 6 March , 2002 From Sept. 2008 To probe the Godhra train burning incident of 27 Feb. , 2002 ) to 21 Oct , 2014

8. Rangnath Mishra Commission 29 Oct , 2004 , 21 May , 2007 53. Youth Affairs , Games and Sports According to ' BHARAT 2025 , India has the largest youth population in the world , The youth in the age group of 15-29 years comprise more then 27.5 % of the population .
National Commission for Religious and Linguistic Minorities . persons in the age - group of 15-29 years The NYP - 2024 is set to synergise the hopes and aspirations of youth to enable harmonious growth of society .
Schemes for Youth :
The Department of Youth Affairs undertook comprehensive exercise to re - structure / consolidate all the schemes which are now being operated by Department of Youth Affairs into 3 flagship Schemes as follows Join on Telegram @apna_channels
National Youth Policy
The National Youth Policy , 2014 ( NYP - 2014 ) was launched in 2014 , replacing the erstwhile National Youth Policy , 2003. The Policy defines Youth as

4. Youth Hostels
Youth Hostels are built to promote youth travel and to enable the young people to experience the rich cultural heritage of the country . The construction of the youth hostels is a joint venture of the central and state governments . While the central government bears the cost of construction , the state governments provide fully developed land free - of - cost , with water supply , electricity connection and approach roads . Youth hostels are located in areas of historical and cultural value , in educational centres , in tourist destinations , etc. Such hostels provide good accommodation for the youth at reasonable rates .

5. Assistance to Scouting and Guiding Organisation ➤ The Department provides assistance to the scouting and guiding organisations , with a view to promote the scouts and guides movement in the country . This is an international movement aimed at building character , confidence , idealism and spirit of patriotism and service among young boys and girls .

54. Olympic Games .
The Games were first held in honour of the Greek god , Zeus in 776 BC in the plain of the kingdom of Elis , nestled in a lush valley between the Alpheus River and Mount Kronion , 15 km from the Ionian Sea . The oldest sanctuary of Greece was there , the altar of the Great Mother of Gods Rhea ( Earth ) . Rhea .
Modern Olympic Games
Olympic Symbol . It comprises five rings or circles , linked together to represent the sporting friendship of all Not more than fiftens Telegram @apna_channels
awards are given
Join on

6. Saikhom Mirabai Chanu - Women's Weightlifting 49kg . Vinesh Phogat's disqualification On the cusp of glory , wrestler Vinesh Phogat's campaign in her third Olympics ended amid drama as the seasoned wrestler , who stunned Japan's World , and Olympic champion Yui Susaki on her way to the women's 50kg final , was disqualified after weighing 100 grams more than the permissible limit in the mening weigh - in ahead of the final Join on Telegram @apna_channels

40. 44 42 ' 40 27. 24 20 12 13 18 319 16
126 .
PR China
Japan
Australia France ( host ) Netherlands Great Britain .

16. 26 ' 22 15 7 12
22 29
South Korea
' 8 .
139
10 °
12 13 15
Italy
Germany
1213 8
India

1. .5 °
Brisbane : Host of the 35th Olympic Games 2032 . Brisbane in Australia was officially announced as host of Summer Olympics and Paralympic Game in 2032 at an Internationala_kiran - Olympic Committee ( IOC ) session in Tokyo on July 21 , 2021 . Brisbane will be the third Australian city to host the Olympics as Australia has previously hosted two Olympics - first in Melbourne in 1956 and then in Sydney in 2000. Brisbane's bid for the 2032 games was unopposed . 55. Paralympics and Winter Olympics Thefirst Games for disabled athletes were held in 1948 in Stoke Mandeville , England . On the day of the Opening Ceremony of the 1948 Olympic Games in London , the Stoke Mandeville Games were also launched and the first competition for wheelchair - bound athletes was organized . Olympic style Games for athletes with disability were organized for the first time in Rome in 1960 , immediately after the Olympic Games . They are considered thefirst Paralympic Games . Since then , Paralympic Games have been organized after every four years . The Paralympic Games have always been held in the same year as the Olympic Games . Other disability groups were added in Toronto ( Canada ) in 1976 and the idea of merging together different disability groups for international sports competitions , was conceived . In the same year , the first Paralympic Winter Games took place in Sweden . "
India in Paralympics .
India's most successful Paralympic campaign to date unfolded at the 2024 Paris Games , where Indian athletes achieved an extraordinary feat , securing a record- breaking 29 medals - 7 gold , 9 silver , and 13 bronze .

28. 63
18 17
14 10 17 41 10 7 9 13 29 : 16 : Winter Olympic Games¨ ·
The Winter Olympic Games started in 1924 AD when the first Games were held at Chamonix , France followed by . St. Moritz , Switzerland ( 1928 & 1948 ) ; Lake Placid , New York ( 1932 & 1980 ) ; Garmisch - Parthenkirchen , Germany ( 1936 ) ; Oslo , Norway ( 1952 ) ; Cortina d'Ampezzo , Italy ( 1956 ) ; Squaw Valley , California ( 1960 ) ; Innsbruck , Austria ( 1964 & 1976 ) ; Grenoble , France ( 1968 ) ; Sapporo , Japan ( 1972 ) ; Sarajevo , Yugoslavia ( 1984 ) ; Calgary , Canada ( 1988 ) and Albertville , France ( 1992 ) . The XVII Winter Olympic Games were held in Lillehammer ( Norway ) in February 1994. Incidentally , the 1994 Games were the first in accordance with the International Olympic Committee's new cycle ofhaving Winter Games and Summer Games two years apart , instead of in the same year , as had been the tradition since the commencement of these Games in 1924 . > The XIXWinter Games were held in Salt Lake City ( USA ) in February , 2002. Germany topped in the Medals Tally winning 35 medals ( including 12 Golds ) while Norway finished as runner - up bagging 24 medals ( 11 Golds ) . The XX Winter Olympics 2006 were held in Turin ( Italy ) . in February , 2006. Germany once again topped the medals tally . The four - member Indian team was led by luge athlete Shiva Keshavan . @apna Olympics was held in Vancouver , Canada in Feb. , XXI Winter Olympics 2010 ( February 12-25 , 2010 ) : This 2010. Total 2700 players of 82 countries participated . XXII Winter Olympics 2014 ( February 7-23 , 2014 ) : 22nd Winter Olympic Games at Sochi ( Russia ) , the 17 day costlisest Olympics ever ( $ 51 billion ) of sport - driven global unity . concluded on February 23 , 2014. Sochi Winter Olympics 2014 saw three athletes from India , luger Shiva Keshawan- ( fifth consecutive participation in the Winter Olympics ) , Alpine skier Himanshu Thakur and cross - country skier Nadeem Iqbal represented the country . XXIII Winter Olympics 2018 ( 9-25 February , 2018 ) : Inaugurated on Feb. 9 at Pyeong Chang Olympic Plaza and concluded on Feb. 25 , 2018. 23rd Winter Olympics saw two athletes from India , ( i ) Jagdish Singh , in Cross - Country Skiing ( Men's 15 km Free ) event and ( ii ) Shiva Keshavan in Luge ( Men's Singles ) event . XXIV Winter Olympic Games Beijing 2022 Overview
. :
GSB Total 0 0 0 0 0 .
Paralympics - Place
1968- Tel Aviv , Israel
1972- Heidelberg , Germany
02 .0 :
2 4
1984- New York , USA
2004- Athens , Greece
2012- London , UK ,
2016- Rio , Brazil
2020 - Tokyo , Japan
19 29
2024 - Paris , France
First Ever Gold for India : India's Devendra created history by winning the first ever gold for the country in Athens Paralympics 2004. He claimed gold in Javelin throw .
· Paris 2024 Paralympic Games 28 August - 8 September , 2024 Paris , France 549 in 22 sports
Date
Host City
Events
Date
1-20 February , 2022
Countries
8170
Host Country
China :
Competitors : 4,433 ( Men - 2,463 + Women- 1,970 }
Athletes
2,834
Medal Tally Paris Paralympics 2024 ( Top 10 Countries and India )
Teams Events
91 109
Total Rank by :
India at 2022 Winter Olympics Competitors Flag bearer ( Opening ) : Flag bearer ( Closing ) . Medals
Rank
Country
Total
1 : ( 1 Man and 0 Women ) . Arif Khan
1 People's Republic of China 94 76 51 221
2. Great Britain
49 41 31 124
Volunteer
United States of America 36 42 27 105
No Medal ( G - 0 , S - 0 , B0 Total - 0 )
27 17 12 563
Netherlands
25 26 38 89 .
5 Brazil
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

7. Australia No medal Australia N. P.
Athlete's Oath Main venue Closing ceremony :
12 .
( New Zealand )
1954 Vancouver ( Canada )
9 England No medal Englands G - 2 S - 1
India's flag - bearer at the closing ceremony .
1958 Cardiff ( Britain )
Join on Telegram @apna_ channels

40. Bhavina Patel .
India
: 34
Tennis
Canada
16 °
Bronze Women's Hockey
22 .
Hockey
41 : Team India .
112
New Zealand
$ 20
Gold Women's 48 kg
.17 :
Boxing
42 - Nitu Ghanghas
Gold
Men's 51 kg
Boxing

13. Amit Panghal
India's medal winners at CWG 2022
Eldhose Paul . $ 45 . Abdulla Aboobacker Silver
Gold
Men's Triple Jump Athletics
Athlete / Team Medal Event :
Sport Weightlifting
Silver Men's 55 kg
Sanket Sargar
Men's Triple Jump Athletics Bronze 10,000 m Race Walk Athletics
Bronze Men's 61 kg
Weightlifting
46 Sandeep Kumar

2. Gururaja Poojary
Gold
Women's 49 kg
Bronze Women's Javelin ' Gold Women's 50 kg
Weightlifting
Javelin throw
3 Mirabai Chanu

47. Annu Rani
Silver
Women's 55 kg
Boxing
Weightlifting

48. Nikhat Zareen
4 Bindyarani Devi :
Men's 67 kg
Table Tennis
Gold
Sharath Kamal / Sath - Silver Men's doubles
Jeremy Lalrinnunga
Weightlifting
49 .
iyan Gnanasekaran
Gold
Men's 73 kg .
Weightlifting
" Achinta Sheuli
6 :
Bronze Mixed doubles :
Squash

50. Dipika Pallikal /
Women's 48 kg
Sushila Devi Likma - Silver
Judo
Saurav Ghosal
bam
Bronze Men's Singles Silver Women's cricket
Kidambi Srikanth
Badminton . Cricket Table Tennis
151 .
Judo
Bronze Men's 60 kg

8. Vijay Kumar Yadav
Team India
Bronze Women's 71 kg
Weightlifting
52 .
9 Harjinder Kaur
Gold Mixed Doubles
53 : Sharath Kamal /
Lawn bowls :
Women's fours

10. Indian women's team Gold
Sreeja Akula
Men's 96 kg
Weightlifting
11 : Vikas Thakur
Silver
Treesa Jolly / Gayatri Bronze Women's doubles
Badminton
Men's team
Gold
Table Tennis Badminton Weightlifting

12. Indian men's team .
Gopichand .
Indian mixed team
Silver Mixed team
Silver Men's +92 kg
Boxing
13 .

55. Sagar Ahlawat
14 : Lovepreet Singh
Bronze Men's 109 kg Bronze Men's singles Silver Women's +78 kg Bronze Men's +109 kg Bronze Men's high jump Silver Men's long jump Gold
PV Sindhu
Gold
Women's Singles
Badminton Badminton
56 .
Squash Judo
15 Saurav Ghosal
Gold
Men's Singles :

57. Lakshya Sen
16 : Tulika Maan 17. Gurdeep Singh 18. Tejaswin Shankar 19. Murali Sreeshankar 20 Sudhir
Table Tennis
Weightlifting apr59 .

58. Sathiyan Granasekaran Bronze Men's Singles .
Gold Men's Singles
Sharath Kamal .. Kiran 60 Satwiksairaj Rankireddy - Chirag
Table Tennis
Athletics
Gold Men's Doubles :
Badminton
Athletics
Shetty
Men's heavyweight Para power- lifting
Silver Men's Hockey Hockey
Team India
61 :
Men's Freestyle 65 kg Wrestling .
Gold

21. Bajrang Punia 22 : Sakshi Malik

57. Asian Games
Women's Freestyle Wrestling .62 kg
Gold
The first Asian Games began on March 4 , 1951 in New Delhi . The Asian Games Association has chosen shining sun as its symbol . The AGF ( Asian Games Federation ) adopted Ever Onward ' , given by Pt . Jawaharlal Nehru , as the motto of the Asian Games .. The emblem of Asian Games is a bright full rising sun with interlocking rings . The Maharaja of Patiala presented the Torch and the Flag for the first Asian Games and since then they have been carried from country to country . ASIAN Games since 1951
Gold Men's Freestyle Wrestling .
23 : Deepak Punia
86 kg
Silver Women's Freestyle Wrestling 57 kg Bronze Women's 68 kg Wrestling . Bronze Men's Freestyle Wrestling

24. Anshu Malik .
25 Divya Kakran 26. Mohit Grewal
125 kg

27. Priyanka Goswami Silver Women's 10,000 m Athletics
Race Walk :

28. Avinash Sable
Silver Men's 3000 m / stee Athletics
plechase ww
29 : Indian men's team :
Silver Men's four Bronze Women's 60 kg
Lawn bowls Boxing
Number Number Number

30. Jaismine Lamboria
Game
Places
Bronze Women's Freestyle Wrestling 50 kg
Serial

31. Pooja Gehlot
countries « sports players
1951 New Delhi ( India )
11 :
491
Men's 57 kg . Wrestling

32. Ravi Kumar Dahiya
Gold
1954 Manila ( Philippines )
2ut
1021
Women's 53 kg Wrestling
Gold

33. Vinesh Phogat
1958 Tokyo ( Japan ) ,
201
$ 1422
Wrestling
Gold Men's 74 kg
34 : Naveen
1962 Jakarta ( Indonesia )
4th ,
13 .
1545
Bronze Women's 76 kg
Wrestling

35. Pooja Sihag
1966 Bangkok ( Thailand )
188 $ 14 .
1915
Bronze Men's 97 kg
Wrestling
1970 Bangkok ( Thailand ) 1974 Tehran ( Iran )
6th

36. Deepak Nehra
13 ,
1752
Boxing
Hussa - Bronze Men's 57 kg
37 , Mohammad mudding
25 .
1978 Bangkok ( Thailand )
Join on Telegram @apna channels

6. - 1970 '
7th
12 °

7. 1974
5th
1978 11
: 11
28 %
5th
: 57
.25
13 :
..19 °
The three mascots of the Games , Congcong , Lianlian and Chenchen , known collectively as the " Memories of Jiangnan " , were unveiled on 3rd April 2020. They are " depicted as robotic superheroes originating from the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City , the West Lake and the Grand Canal respectively .
5th
37 .
.23 .
@apna_kira
11th
8th
1994 :
9th :
35 °
11 :
7 :
8th
.13 '
11 .
Slogan
26 .
8th
10 .
The official slogan of the 2022 Asian Games ; " Heart to Heart , @Future " was announced on 15 December , 2019 to mark 1,000 days before the opening ceremonies . The slogan is intended to symbolise the connectivity that the Asian Games create between the countries of Asia . Theme Song The official theme song of the Games , " With You and Me " , was released along with its music video on April 27 , 2023. It is performed by Angela Zhang , Jackson Wang , Sunnee and JC - T . The song was selected through a global competition to compose the Asian Games theme song and was originally created by a team from Thailand , Nadao Music . The original title of the song is " Let's Celebrate " or Puean Kan " in Thai and was sang by Ice Paris , Billkin , PP Krit , Nana Sawanya . Desciplinės Competitve Sports- 24 , Ball Sports- 18 , Adversary Sports - 9 , Water Sports - 10
6th
.33
8th
17 2014 $ 11
· 36
8th

18. 2018
.70
19 2022 28
• 38 :
.107
Final Medals Tally : 2022 Asian Games NOC Gold Silver Bronze : Total
Rank
201 111. 71
China ( CHN )
1 :
383
188
67 ° 69
Japan ( JPN )
South Korea ( KOR )
190
42 :
.89
India
107
-38 .
1:41
-Uzbekistan ( UZB )

22. 18
Chinese Taipei
20 .
28 .
STPE )
Iran ( IRI )
.20 °
Thailand
Bahrain
Schedule
39 .
10 :
DPR Korea
18 .
11 .
There are 40 sports including swimming , archery , athletics , badminton , baseball and softball , basketball , boxing , etc. , and 61 disciplines at Hangzhou Asian Games . During 15 competition days , athletes will compete for 483 gold medals . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
XIX ASIAN GAMES ( September 23 - October 8 , 2023 ) The 19th Asian Games held in Hangzhou , Zhejiang Province , China from Sept , 23 to Oct. 8 , 2023 .

58. SAF Games
Squash
The South Asian Federation Games ( SAF Games ) is a sport festival of South Asian countries . The South Asian Sports Federation comprising India , Pakistan , Sri Lanka , Bangladesh , Nepal , Bhutan and Maldives was formed in New Delhi on November 26 , 1982 . The first SAF Games were held in Kathmandu in 1981 followed by Dhaka ( 1985 ) , Kolkata . ( 1987 ) , Islamabad ( 1989 ) , Colombo ( 1991 ) , Dhaka ( 1993 ) and Chernal ( 1995 ) . The Eighth SAF Games ( September 25 - October 4 , 1999 ) were held in Kathmandu . The 10th South Asian Federation Games ( 18-28 August , 2006 ) were held in Sri Lanka and India retained the crown , with 118 Gold , 69 Silver and 47 Bronze . Pakistan ( 43-44-71 ) and hosts Sri Lanka ( 3-63-78 ) came on the second and third positions respectively in the medals tally . Flag and Motto of the SAF Games The SAF Games flag includes a dove , suggesting the desire for peace in the area . The motto of the SAF Games is ' Peace , Prosperity and · Progress ' . New Name for SAF Games : The SAF Games have been rechristened as South Asian Games ( SAG ) , according to a decision taken by the South Asian Sports Federation at its . 32nd meeting held in Islamabad ( Pakistan ) on April 2 , 2004. ” 13th South Asian Games 2019 Kathmandu , Pokhara & Janakpur Nepal
Cricket
0 .
Kabaddi
" 2
Badmintion
Tennis
Equestrian
Hockey
0 .
Rowing
' 3
Chess
.2 .
Wrestling
5 .
Boxing
Sailing
Bridge
.0 .
Golf
Wushu
Roller skating
Canoe
0 .
Sepaktakraw
Table tennis
Highlights Of XIX Asian Games
> " A 655 - member Indian continget participated at the Asian Games 2023 in Hangzhou , the People's Republic of China from September 23 to October 8 , 2023 . The 19th edition of the continental quadrennial
multisport meet was originally scheduled for 2022 but @ apna_kiran was postponed by a year due to COVID 19 . India finished their Asian Games 2023 campaign with a record haul of 107. medals - 28 gold , 38 silver and 41 bronze . This surpassed India's previous record tally achieved at the last edition at Jakarta 2018 , where a 570 - strong Indian squad racked up 70 medals - 16 gold , 23 silver and 31 bronze . China led the overall Asian Games 2023 medals tally with 201 gold , ahead of Japan ( 52 ) and the Republic of Korea ( 42 ) .. Only four countries won over 100 medals in Hangzhou . > Shooting led the way for India at the Asian Games ** 2023 with an unprecedented haul of 22 medals , which included seven gold . > Athletics , headlined by Neeraj Chopra's successful title defence in the javelin throw , came a close second with 6 gold along with 14 silver and 9 bronze .
Host city Host Country Nations participating 75 Athletes participating . 2715 . Events Opening ceremony Closing ceremony Officially opened by
317 in 26 sports

1. December
10 December
Bidhya Devi Bhandari ( President of Nepal ) Paras Khadka ( cricket ) : Deepak Thapa ( badminton ) .
Athlete's Oath
Judge's Oath Torch lighter Main venue
Deepak Bista
Dasarath Rangasala Stadiu
The 2019 South Asian Games , officially the XIII South Asian Games , was a major multi - sport event which was originally slated to be held from 9th to 18th March , 2019 in Kathmandu and Pokhara , Nepal . However , the dates were postponed and the event was held from 1st 10th December 2019 , coincidentally at the same time as the 2019 Southeast Asian Games in the Philippines .. The new dates were confirmed at the South Asian Olympic Council Executive Board meeting in Bangkok . on 1st March 2019 .
China led the overall Asian Games 2023 medals tally with 201 gold ahead of Japan ( 52 ) and the Republic of Korea ( 42 ) . India also earned their first Asian Games badminton gold medal courtesy of the men's doubles pair of Chirag Shetty and Satwiksairaj Rankireddy . Squash , tennis and equestrian completed the 28 gold medals for India in Hangzhou . In addition to medals , Hangzhou offered 74 Paris 2024 Olympic quotas - 6 in archery , 10 in artistic swimming , 34 in boxing , 2 in breaking , 2 in hockey , 10 in modern . pentathlon , 6 in sailing , 2 in tennis and 2 in water polo .
The Dasarath Stadium hosted the opening ceremony along with the men's football tournament , with the stadium's renovation after the 2015 earthquake completed in under 10 months with an increased capacity of 20,000 along with the closing ceremony on 10th December . Join on Telegram @apna_channels
прицу

59. Cricket .
It is believed that Cricket was started in England in 1300 A.D. It started as a game of shepherds and became popular among other classes in 18th century A.D. After sometime a club known as " Merylebone Cricket Club ” ( M.C.C. ) was formed at Lords in London . Cricket became popular in Australia due to British influence there . The first official cricket test match was played in the year 1877 between Australia and England in Melbourne . When some other countries started playing Cricket Imperical Cricket Conference was formed in 1909 which gave birth to International Cricket Conference in 1956 . The first One Day International cricket match was played in the year 1971 between England and Australia in Melbourne . The first World Cup of one day matches was played in 1975 in London . West Indies won the World Cup beating Australia by 17 runs . The apex institution of world cricket is the ' International . Cricket Council ' ( ICC ) and its headquarters is now in Dubai from August 1 , 2005. Earlier it was in Lords ( England ) . Australia has won maximum of five World Cups till 2015 . In India Cricket was introduced by British royalty . Parsee community of India was the first to take part in
The committee · also revealed the official logo¨ of the Games , a flying pigeon that embodies the vibrant colour of the logo of South Asia Olympic " Council . It also includes SOUTH ASIAN GAMES - 2019 world heritage sites and mountains of Nepal in the background .
KATHMANDU POKHARA 3.10 December , 2019 .
The Games .
Participating nations
✓ Seven countries competed . For the first time since 1999 , Afghanistan did not compete at the South Asian Games , after leaving the South Asia Olympic Council in 2016 . A total of 2,715 athletes competed . Bangladesh ( 470 ) * , Bhutan ( 116 ) * , India ( 487 ) * , Maldives . ( 216 ) * , Nepal ( 596 ) * , Pakistan ( 263 ) * , Sri Lanka ( 564 ) * .
Sports
These Games featured 26 sports with cricket returning :
after 8 years . Golf and karate were the two sports addeda_kiran Cricket in 1848 . by the hosts as their choice . All events must include a minimum of four participating teams otherwise it will not be held . Paragliding , which was scheduled to debut , was removed , as only two nations ( Nepal and Pakistan ) ..had registered competitors ..
Later on Parsee team visited England in 1886. Matches between European and Parsee teams , called Presidency matches , were started in Poona ( now Pune ) and Bombay ( now Mumbai ) .
Some New Records
Raja Bhupindra Singh of Patiala donated the Ranji Trophy in 1934 for the national championship of Cricket . The Board of Control for Cricket in India was formed in 1927 . _ The ICC World Test Championship The ICC World Test Championship is intended to become the premier championship for Test cricket run by International Cricket Council ( ICC ) . It will replace the One - day International competition the ICC Champions Trophy , which was held in 2013 for the last time . Measurements in cricket : > Length of the Pitch - 22 yards ( 20.11metres ) Length of the Crease - 1.22 - 1.83 metres ( 4 ft . ) Weight of the Ball - 155 to 163 gram Circumference of the Ball - 22.4 -22.9 cm ( 9 Inch ) > Length of the Bat - 96.5 cm ( 38 inch ) Width of the Bat - 10.8 cm ( 4.25 inch ) > Length of the Stumps - 71.1 cm ( 28 inch ) . Length of Bells - 11.1cm ( each bell ) Winners of World Cup Cricket since 1975 Year Place
Indian high jumper Sarvesh Anil Kushare created Games record in the final of the high jump event . He jumped a height of 2.21 meter breaking 2.20 meters set by Sri Lankan athlete Manjula Kumara at the 2004 edition . Karthik Unnikrishnan of India broke the previous Games ' Triple jump record of 16.45 metres set by Indian Renjith Maheshwary in the previous edition . Hejumped a distance of 16.47 metres to win the gold medal . Asian Games champion , Tejinder Pal Singh set a new Games record in Shot put . He threw the shotata distance of 20.03 metres breaking previous record of 19.15 metres set by another Indian athlete Bahadur Singh Sagoo in the 1999 edition .
Total
Medal Table : 13th SAG ( 2019 ) Nation Gold Silver Bronze Total India ( IND ) 174 93 45 312 Nepal ( NEP ) 51 60 95 206 128 251
Rank
Sri Lanka ( SRI )
59132
Pakistan ( PAK )
32 °
87138
Bangladesh ( BAN ) 19
Winner West Indies Australia
NOIS NP .
Maldives ( MDV )
( 0 )
1975 England
Bhutan ( BHU )
$ 1979 England
West Indies England
316 431 1064 1983 England
als ( 7nations ) .
West Indies
India
* No of atheletion Telegram @apna_channels

60. Football
It is believed that Football is also of British origin . However , it is said that a game similar to Football was played in 500 B.C. by the Greeks of Sparta and they called this game ' Harpaston ' . The first football club of the world ' Sheffield Football Club ' was founded in the year 1857 in England .
Football was introduced in India by the Britishers in 1848 and the first football club of India was ' Dalhousie Club ' . The Indian Football Association , the oldest football association in the east , was formed in 1878. ⠀⠀ The apex institution of football is ' Federation of International de Football Association ' ( FIFA ) , which was formed by seven countries on May 21 , 1904. The headquarters of FIFA is in Paris ( France ) .
In order to distinguish this game from the carryingna Year cum kicking game i.e. Rugby , it was given the name of " Soccer " . This name was given to this game ( Football ) by an association named London Football Association which was formed in 1863 in England . The Football World Cup , organized by the FIFA , is the biggest compétition . Football was included as a competitive game in Olympic Games officially in 1908 . India took part in the World Olympic Football Competition in 1948 in London . Besides Olympic competitions , World Cup Football Championships were planned by two Frenchmen i.e. M Jules Rimet and Henry Delaunay . Jules Rimet was president of the French Football Federation and remained president of FIFA from 1924 to 1954 . The first World Cup was organised at Monte Video ( Uruguay ) in 1930 . The Trophy for this championship was named as Jules Rimet Cup " . This trophy became the permanent property of Brazil , as this country had won the world title for the third time ( 1958 , 1962 and 1970 ) , From 1974 ( Xth championship of Germany ) onwards , the trophy was named as " The FIFA World Cup " . This was a new trophy cast in 18 ct gold .
Plate
Mascot Winner
Runners up
Kir :
1930 Uruguay
Uruguay
Argentina
Czechoslovakia
„ Italy
1934 Italy
Hungary
Italy .
1938 France
1942
Cancelled due to 2nd World War
1946
Brazil
Uruguay
1950 Brazil
West Germany Hungary
1954 Switzerland
Brazil :
Sweden
1958 Sweden 1962 Chile
Czechoslovakia
Brazil
West Germany
1966 England 1970 Mexico 1974 West Germany Tip and Tap :
England .
Willie Juanito
Brazil > '
Italy
West Germany Holland
1978 Argentina 1982 Spain
Gauchito Argentina
Holland
West Germany
Naranjito Italy
1986 Mexico .
Pique Ciao Striker Footix
Argentina
West Germany
1990 Italy 1994 U.S.
A. 1998 France 2002 Japan and S. Korea : 2006 Germany . 2010 South Africa
West Germany Argentina
Brazil
Italy
France
Brazil
Ato , Kaz Brazil & Nik Goleo Italy . Zakumi Spain
Germany
France
Netherlands ( Holland )
2014 Brazil 2018 Russia 2022 Qalar
Fuleco Germany France La'ccb Argentina ( Scheduled )
Argentina
Croatla
France
In India Indian Football Association ( IFA ) organises 2026 USA , Canada National Football Championship .
and Mexico
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

1975. Kuala Lumpur 1978 Buenos Aires 1982 Mumbai
Pakistan
First
India
Pakistan Holland .
Sixth
Pakistan West Germany Fifth
Australia England
Twelfth
1986 London
Holland Pakistan
Tenth
1990 Lahore
Pakistan . , Holland , Holland Spain
1994 Sydney
Fifth
1998 Utrecht
Ninth
@ apna2002 Kuala Lumpur
Tenth
Germany Australia
ans
Qatar
Host
2006 Monchengladbach ( Germany ) 2010 New Delhi
Germany Australia
Eleventh
: 20 Nov. to 18 Dec. , 2022
Duration
Total Matches
Australia Germany
Eighth
Teams
: 32
2014 The Hegue
Australia Netherlands Ninth
Goals Scored -
172 .
2018 Bhubaneswar ( India ) Belgium Netherlands Sixth 2023 Odisha
Venue
Ninth
Germany Belgium
Final Tournament Standings
Host of next Hockey World Cups - Belgium and the Netherlands will jointly host the men's and women's FIH Hockey World Cups in 2026 . ⠀⠀ Odisha Hockey Men's World Cup 2023
Winner
ARGENTINA ( 3rd title ) . FRANCE
Runners - Up
-Awards
In FIH Odisha Hockey Men's World Cup 2023 Harmanpreet Singh lead Indian full squad , Amit Rohidas was the vice - captain of the 18 - man Indian squad for the quadrennial meet which held from January 13 to 29 , 2023 in Bhubaneswar and Rourkela . Germany defeated Belgium in final in a penalty short -out 5-4 .
* Golden Ball-
Lionel Messi - Kylian MBAPPE Emiliano Martinez Enzo Fernandez ENGLAND
Golden Boot
Golden Glove Best Young Player Award : FIFA Fair Play Award

61. Hockey
Mascot ☐
' Blackheath Rugby and Hockey Club ' is the first hockey club in the world which was set up in the year 1861 in England . London was the first city in England to popularize this game in the 1870s . In the year 1886 , Hockey Association of England was formed in London . The apex institution of hockey is Federation Internationale de Hockey , established on January 7 , 1924 , with headquarters at Vienna ( Austria ) and later shifted to Paris ( France ) . The first International Hockey
Olly , the Olive Ridley turtle has been aptly chosen as the mascot for the men's hockey . World Cup .
HOCKEY .
The Format :
A total of 44 games were played across the two venues , involving the world's 16 top teams . The 16 teams were divided into four pools : Pool A : Australia , South Africa , France , Argentina , Pool B Belgium , Japan , Korea , Germany , Pool C : Netherlands , Chile , Malaysia , New Zealand , Pool D India , Wales , Spain , England Join on Telegram @apna_channels

62. Some Important Facts
Volleyball
Volleyball , the game played with an inflated bladder and a highnet was invented in 1895 at Holyoke Y.M.C.A. Gymnasium in United States of America by a Physical Director William J. Morgan . Its first name was ' MINTONNETTE ' which was later named as Volleyball by Dr. A.T. Halsted of Springfield College because the ball had to be volleyed with hands from one side to the other .
Badminton .
Modern Badminton was probably developed in the 17th century and named from the place ' Badminton ' in Gloucestershire ( England ) . > The International Badminton Federation ( IBF ) was established in 1934 . Badminton Association of India was formed in 1934 . trophy for the international matches was named
" International Volleyball Association ' was formed inna kira Themas Cup after the name of the first president of
1947 with its headquarters in Paris ( France ) . The first World Volleyball Championship was held in 1949 at Prague . The first Asian Volleyball Championship was held at Tokyo ( Japan ) in 1955 ( India beats Japan in the final ) . The Volleyball Federation of India was formed in 1950 . Measurements : Length of the court - 18m , Width of the court 9 metre , Weight of the ball - 250 to 260 grams , Circumference of the ball - 65-67 cm , Net - 1m ( ± 3 cm ) . wide and 9.5 m long , Net's height - 2.43m ( for men ) and . 2.24 m ( for women ) . Ball's internal pressure - 0.40 -0.45 kg / cm . Terminology : Antennae , Attack hit ,. Back zone players , Dribbling , Libero , Front zone players , Blocking , Smash , Rotation , Boosting , Net fault , Volley pass , Forearm pass , Service , Hook serve , Set up , Referee etc. Table Tennis . This game was started in England in 1880s . International Table Tennis Association ' was established in 1926 . Thefirstmatchof The Table Tennis World Championship was played in 1927 . Table Tennis was introduced in the Olympic games much later in 1988 at Seoul ( S. Korea ) . Table Tennis Association of India was formed in 1938 . Measurements : Length of the table - 2.74 metre ( 9 feet ) , Width of the table- 1.52 metre ( 5 feet ) , Height of the table 76 cm , Weight of the ball -2.4 to 2.53 gram , Diametre of the ball - 37.2-38.2 mm , Colour of the ball white or yellow .
the IBF Sir George Thomas . Thomas Cup competition ( for men ) started in 1948-49 . Uber Cup Championship ( for women ) started in 1956 . World Badminton Championship started in 1977 . Measurements : Length of the court - 44 feet , Width - 20 feet ( for Doubles ) and 17 feet ( for Singles ) , Height of the net - 5 feet , Weight of the Shuttle cock - 4.74 to 5.50 gram , Overall length of the Racket - 680 mm ( 2.5 ft . ) maximum , Overall width of the Racket - 230 mm ( 9 ) inches ) maximum , Overall length of the racket head- 290 mm ( 11.5 inches ) maximum , Weight of the racket- between 85 to 140 grams . Terminology : Badminton Court , End , Trans Lines , Back : gallery , Service Court , Let , Forward Stroke , Backward Stroke , Toss or Lob , Clear , Smash , Net strokes , Rally Setting , First hand or Second hand , Side out , Base of operation , Rotation , Long service , Net fault , Double fault , Foot Fault , Service break , Match point , Set point , High service , Cross shot , Service change , Drive , Dropshot , Duce , Advance etc.
Lawn Tennis
Tennis was introduced by Major Wingfeild in Wales
in 1870 .
All England Championship ( popularly known as Wimbledon Championship ) started in 1877 for men only . Tennis competitions for women ( in Wimbledon Championship ) were introduced in 1884 . Measurements : Length of the court - 78 feet or 23.77 m ( singles ) , Width of the court - 27 feet or 8.23 m ( singles ) , Join on Telegram @apna_channels

463. Cups and Trophies : @apna Hockey : Aga Khan Cup , Begam Rasul Trophy ..
( women's ) , Maharaja Ranjit Singh Gold Cup , Lady Ratan Tata Trophy ( women's ) , Gurunanak Championship ( women's ) Dhyanchand Trophy , Nehru Trophy , Sindhia Gold Cup , Murugappa Gold Cup , Wellington Cup etc. Football : Beghum Hazarat Mahal Cup , Merdeka Cup , BILT Cup , Bordoloi Trophy , Colombo Cup , Confederation . Cup , DC M Trophy , Durand Cup , Rovers Cup , B.C. Rai Trophy ( National Championship ) , FIFA World Cup , Jules Rimet Trophy , Kalinga Cup , Santosh Trophy ( National Championship ) , IFA Shield , Scissor Cup , Subroto Mukherjee Cup , Sir Ashutosh Mukherjee Trophy , Todd Memorial Trophy , Vittal Trophy etc. Cricket : Anthony D Mellow Trophy , Ashes , Asia Cup , Benson and Hedges Cup , Bose Trophy , Champions Trophy , Charminar Challenger Cup , C.K. Naidu Trophy , Cooch Behar Trophy , Deodhar Trophy , Duleep Trophy , Gavaskar - Border Trophy , G.D. Birla Trophy , Gillette Cup , Ghulam Ahmad Trophy , Hakumat Rai Trophy , ICC World Cup , Irani Trophy , Interface Cup , Jawaharlal Nehru Cup , Lomboard World Challenge Cup , Mc Dowells Challenge : Cup , Merchant Cup , Moin- ud - Dowla Cup , Nat West Trophy , Prudential Cup ( World Cup ) , Rani Jhansi Trophy , Ranji Trophy , Rohinton Baria Trophy , Rothmans Cup , Sahara Cup , Sharjah Cup , Sheesh Mahal Trophy , Sheffield Shield , Singer Cup , Sir Frank Worrel Trophy , Texaco Cup , Titan Cup , Vijay Hazare Trophy , Vijay Merchant Trophy , Vizzy Trophy , Wisden Trophy , Wills Trophy , World Series / Cup , Table Tennis : Berna Bellack Cup ( men ) , Corbillion Cup ( women ) , Jai Laxmi cup ( women ) , Rajkumari Challenge Cup ( women junior ) , Ramanuja Trophy ( men junior ) , Travancore Cup ( women ) , Swathling Cup ( men ) etc. Join on Telegram @apna channels
Chess
The number of squares on a chessboard : 64 ,
45th Chess Olympaid 2024 The 45th Chess Olympiad was held in Budapest ( Hungary ) from Sept. 10 to 23 , 2024. The World's largest team chess competition , with 381 teams ( including 184 teams in the Women's Championship . Team India , won gold for the first time , scoring double gold in both open and women's championsip .
Colour of the squares White and black , Number of samecolour Chess - 16
Terminology : Bishop , Gambit , Checkmate , Stalemate , Grandmaster etc.
Pawn ,
Golf
➤ Measurements
Weight of ball - 45.9 gram , Circum - ference
of ball - 4.27 cm , Field - 125-175 Acres . Diameter of the hole : 4 inches * × Terminology : Bogie , Fore some , Stymie , T , Putt , Put hole , Nib lick , Caddy , Limns , Iron , Putting , The green , Bunker etc.
Water Polo
The length and width of the field : 30 × 20 yards Terminology : 2 metre line , 4 metre line , Goal line , Caps , Personal , Fault , Ball under etc.
Baseball
✗The distance of each base is 90 feet , .The distance of the base along with its hypotenuse - 127 feet

65. National Games and Sports ( world )
Sports
Country Country
Baseball Bull - fighting Ice Hockey and Lacros Hockey O
United States of America
Spain
Canada
India
Shinty Cricket .. Sumo Wrestling Cricket ( de facto )
Scotland
England
Japan
@apna Australia .
Netball : Anantrao Pawar Trophy etc.
Rugby Football : Bledisloe Cup , Calcutta Cup , Webb Ellis Trophy etc. Shooting North Wales Cup , Welsh Grand Prix etc. Volleyball Centennial Cup , Federation Cup , Indira Pradhan Trophy , Shivanthi Gold Cup etc. Yatching : America Cup etc. 64. Famous Stadia and Sports Government of India has recently constituted " National Playing Fields Association of India ( NPFAI ) " under an ambitious scheme of ' Kendriya Yuva Karya Evam Khel Mantralay to cater to the development of Games & Sports and the players as well .
Pakistan
Hockey
Table Tennis ( de facto ) .
China
Archery
Bhutan
Bandy ( de facto ) .
Russia
Volleyball *
Nepal
Kabaddi
Bangladesh ... Brazil
Capoeira
Note Dandi Biyo ( Nepali ) is a game usually played in rural Nepal and was considered the national game unofficially until May 23 2017 , when officially Volleyball was declared as the national sports . 66. Court or Field Associated with Sports Court / Campus / Field Games / Sports
Horse riding Polo , Football , Hockey Sketing , Boxing
Arena
Place
Stadium
Sports
Field
Indoor Games Delhi
Indraprastha Stadium
Ring
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium Athletics
Delhi
Course
Golf
Delhi
Ferozeshah Kotla Ground Cricket
Pool
Swimming Table tennis .
Football
Delhi
Ambedkar Stadium
Board
Shivaji Stadium
Delhi
Hockey
Judo , Karate , Taikwondo
Mat
Hockey
Delhi
National Stadium
Diamond
Baseball
National Stadium
Hockey & others Mumbai
Track
Athletics
Mumbai
Wankhede Stadium .
Cricket .
Pitch
Cricket
Cricket
Mumbai
Brabourne Stadium
Bowls
Greens
Eden Gardens
Cricket :
Kolkata
Rink
Curling , Ice hockey Shooting , Archery
Green Park Stadium
Cricket
Kanpur
Range Vellodrome
Keenan Stadium
Cricket
Jamshedpur
Cycling
Nehru ( Chepak ) Stadium Cricket
Chennai Cuttack
Court
Varabati Stadium
Cricket
Tennis , Badminton , Net Ball , Handball , Volleyball , Squaslı , Kho - kho , Kabaddi
Aintree , Doncaster , Epsom Horse racing
England ( UK )
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

67. Number of Players in Some Popular Sports
Badminton Anup Sridhar , Prakash Padukone , Saina Nehwal , Aparna Popat , Chetan Anand , Pulella Gopichand , Parupalli Kashyap , Dipankar Bhattacharya , P. V. Sindhu , Kidambi Srikanth . Billiards / Snooker : Geet Sethi , Michael Ferreira , Pankaj Advani , Ashok shandilya . Boxing MC Mary Kom , Vijender Singh , Ali Qamar , Dingko Singh , Shiva Thapa : Car Racing Narain Karthikeyan , Armaan Ebrahim ,. Karun Chandhok . Chess Dibyendu Barua , K Sasikiran , P Harikrishna , Parimarjan Negi , Sandipan Chanda , Koneru Humpy , Viswanathan Anand , Tanya Sachdeva , Ramesh babu Praggnanandhaa . Cricket : Lala Amarnath , Vinoo Mankad , Nawab Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi , Sunil Gavaskar , Kapil Dev , Bishan Singh Bedi , E.A.S.Prasanna , Dilip Vengsarkar , Ravi Shashtri , Gundappa Viswanath , Anjum Chopra , Syed Kirmani , K. Srikanth , Ajit Wadekar , Anil Kumble , Md . Azharuddin , Sachin Tendulkar , Saurav Ganguly , Virendra Sehwag , Yuvraj Singh , Zahir Khan , Mahendra Singh Dhoni , Irfan Pathan , Virat Kohli , Rohit Sharma , Mithali Raj , R Ashwin . Football : Baichung Bhutia , Dr. Talimeran Ao , Inivalappil Mani Vijayan . Golf : Gaurav Ghei , Jeev Milkha Singh , Jyoti Randhawa , Shiv Kapur , Arjun Atwal , Sharmila Nicollet . Hockey : Major Dhyan Chand , Dilip Tirkey , Gagan Ajit Singh , Leslie Claudius , Pargat Singh , Dhanraj Pillay . Tennis ( Lawn Tennis ) : Jaidip Mukerjea , Ramesh apristinan , Rohan Bopanna , Vijay Amritraj , Leander Paes , Mahesh Bhupathi , Ramanathan Krishnan , Sania Mirza . Shooting : Vijay Kumar , Abhinav Bindra , Anjali Bhagwat , Gagan Narang , Jaspal Rana , Manavjit Singh Sandhu , Samresh Jung , Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore . Squash Dipika Pallikal , Joshna Chinappa , Ritwik Bhattacharya , Saurav Ghosal . Swimmers : Bula Chaudhury , Mihir Sen. Table Tennis Achanta Sharatha Kamal , Mouma Das , Poulomi Ghatak , Chetan Baboor . Weightliting : Gurpreet Singh , Saikhom Mirabai Chanu , W. Nandini Devi , Nameirakpam Kunjarani Devi , Karnam Malleswari , Bindyarani Devi . Wrestling Dalip Singh Rana , Dara Singh , Gobar Goha , Gulam , Palwinder Singh Cheema , Panne Lal Yadav , The Great Gama , Sushil Kumar , Yogeshwar Dutt , Geeta Phogat . 70. Eminent International Players ( Female )
Number of Players
Sports
( on each side or in cach team )
Baseball
Rugby football
Polo
Water polo
Kho Kho
Kabaddi
Hockey , Football
and Cricket
Netball
Volleyball
Badminton , Tennis and Table tennis
1 or 2
( Singles & Doubles respectively )
Basketball
Several individuals compete simultaneously .
Gymnastic
Billiards Snooker . Boxing / Chess Bridge
2 .
( Two against two as partners ) 2,4 or 6 Several individuals compete simultaneously 10 68. Nicknames of Eminent Players Player
Croquet
Golf
Lacrosse
Nicknames
Major Dhyanchand The Wizard of Hockey
Payyoli Express , Golden Girl , Udanpari , Asia's Sprint Queen The Flying Sikh Magnificent Mary , Super Mom Pocket Dynamo Prince of Calcutta , Bengal Tiger Lightening Kid , Vishy
P.T. Usha
Milkha Singh
Mary Kom
K.D. Jadhav
Saurav Ganguly Viswanathan Anand Rahul Dravid Harbhajan Singh
The Wall , Jammy .
The Turbanator :
Rawalpindi Express Flying Fish Thorpedo , Thorpie , Thorpeiy . Indian Express Black Pearl The Punisher , Las Vegas Kid God of Cricket , Master Blaster The Don Little Master , Sunny
Shoaib Akhtar
Michael Phelps
Ian Thorpe
Paes and Bhupati
Pele
Andre Agassi Sachin Tendulkar . Don Bradman Sunil Gavaskar : Kapil Dev
Haryana Hurricane
M.S. Dhoni
Mahi , MS Chiku
Virat Kohli
Country
Player 1.Martina Navratilova
Sports-
Virender Sehwag
Viru , Nawab of Nazafgarh , Sultan of Multan
Cz / US US
Anil Kumble ,
Tennis
Jumbo

2. Billie Jean King
Ricky Ponting ,
Tennis
Punter
Grete Waitz
Norway
Athletics
Shane Warne
Spin King , Warnie
Steffi Graf
Germany
Tennis
Muttiah Muralitharan Murali
Annika Sorenstam
Sweden
Golf
་་་
Hima Das *********** Dhing Express 69. Eminent Sportspersons ( India ) Archery : Dola Banerjee , Jayanta Talukdar , Limba Ram , Tarundeep Rai , Deepika Kumari . Athletics : Ashwini Nachappa , Jyotirmoyee Sikdar , KM Beenamol , Soma Biswas , Anju Bobby George , Milkha Singh , P.T.Usha , Shiny Abraham , Deepa Karmakar .

6. Mia Hamm
Football
7Venus Williams
Tennis

8. Serena Williams 9.Katie Taylor 10. Maria Sharapo
Tennis
Ireland
Boxing
Russia
Tennis
25-9
11 Tracy Caulkins 12 Sania
Swimmin
India
Tennis
Join on Telegram @apna channels

13. Marianne Vos
Cricket .
Netherlands
Cycling
42 Muttiah Muralitharan Sri Lanka
India
14MC Mary Kom
Boxing
43 , Stan Wawrinka
Switzerland
Tennis
Badminton

15. Saina Nehwal
India
* , ་ ༑ ་ ་

72. Special Awards in Sports Special Awards to winners and their Coaches in International Sports Events According to INDIA 2024 , this Scheme was introduced in 1986 to encourage and motivate outstanding sports persons for higher achievements and to attract the younger . generation to take up sports as a career . Under it , special awards are given to sportspersons and their coaches for winning medals in recognized international sports events ´held in a year at the following prize money : ( a ) Category : Open Category Sports
Badminton
166 PV Sindhur
India
Squash
India
* 17 Dipika Pallikal
18 : Deepika Kumari 19 Jackie Joyner - Kersee
Archery ::
India .
Athletics Gymnastics Track and Field

20. Nadia Comaneci
Romania
21 Wilma Rudolph .
Monica Seles
Yugoslavia / US Tennis
☐ Cricket Cricket
India
Mithali Raj
India
24 Smriti Mandhana

71. Eminent International Players ( Male )
Country
Player .
Sporis
Amount of Award Money ( in Rupees )
Football
Brazil
Pele
Name of Event
Muhammad Ali
Boxing
Gold
Silver Bronze
Athletics
Carl Lewis .
Track and field
1 : Olympic Games ( Summer & Winter ) 75 lakh
2. Asian Games
America
50 lakh
30 lakh .
Jesse Owens
5 , Sir Donald Bradman
Australia
Cricket
30 lakh
20 lakh
10 lakh
India
Hockey
Dhyan Chand

3. Commonwealth Games
30 lakh
20 lakh
10 lakh
Athletics

7. Usain Bolt .
Jamaica

4. World Championships or World Cup ( conducted in Four Year Cycle ) / All England Championship
40 lakh
25 lakh
15 lakh
Cycling

8. Eddy Merckx
Belgium
Rowing
Sir Steve Redgrave …… .. Britain

10. Michael Jordan
basketball
of Badminton
Football
11 Diego Maradona
Argentina

5. World Championships / World Cup 20 lakh 14 lakh 8 lakh ( held once in two years ) 6. World Championships / World Cup 10 lakh 7 lakh ( held annually ) 7. Asian Championships ( held once 15 lakh 10 lakh 5 lakh
Switzerland
Tennis
12 Roger Federer .
Swimmin Cricket

13. Michael Phelps :
India
14 Sachin Tendulkar
@apna_kiran 4 years )
Golf

15. Tiger Woods
Cricket

16. Jan Botham
England

8. Asian Championships ( held once 7.5 lakh 5 lakh 2.5 lakh in 2 years ) 9. Asian Championships ( heldannually ) 3.75 lakh 2.5 lakh 1:25 lakh 10 : Commonwealth Championships 15 lakh 10 lakh 5 lakh ( held once in 4 years ) 11. Commonwealth Championships 7.5 lakh 5 lakh 2.5 lakh ( held once in 2 years ) 12 : Commonwealth Championships 3.75 lakh 2.5 lakh 1.25 lakh ( held once in 1 year ) .. 13. World University Games 3.75 lakh 2.5 lakh 1.25 lakh ( b ) Category : Para Sports
Football
$ 17 . Lionel Messi
Argentina
Cricket
Pakistan

18. Imran Khan
Cricket
Australia

19. Shane Wame .
Football
Portugal

20. Eusebio
Badminton

21. Lin Dan .
China
Golf Football Motor Racing Athletics
Spain
22 Seve Ballesteros
England

23. David Beckham
Michael Schumacher Germany

25. Asbel Kiprop
Kenya ; US .
Golf

26. Jack Nicklaus
Motor Racing Basketball : Tennis

27. Lewis Hamilton
Britain .
Amount of Award Money ( in Rupecs ) Gold Silver Bronze

28. Magic Johnson
Name of Event
29 Jimmy Connors

30. Michael Johnson
Athletics
Paralympic Games ( Summer & Winter ) 75 lakh 50 lakh 30 lakh 2 Para Asian Games : 30 lakh 20 lakh 10 lakh Commonwealth Games ( Para Athletes ) 30 lakh 20 lakh 10 lakh 4 IPC World Cup / Championship ( held 20 lakh 14 lakh 8 lakh biennially ) 5. IPC World Cup / Championship ( held 10 lakh 7 lakh 4 lakh annually ) ( c ) Category : Blind - Sports
West Indies
Cricket
31 Sir Viv Richards
$ 32 Jim Thorpe
Athletics , A Football , Baseball , Basketball Cricket
West Indies England Australia
Sir Gary Sobers
34 Wayne Rooney
Football
35 David Campese Kelly Slater 37. Rafael Nadal
Rugby
Surfing
Spain
Tennis
38 Brian Lara
West Indies Cricket
Amount of Award Moncy ( in Rupees ) . Gold Silver Bronze
39 Cristiano Ronaldo
Portugal
Football
Name of Event

40. George Best
Northern Ireland Football Scotland , Britain Tennis
Murray
IBSA World Championship
10 lakh 7 lakh 4 lakh
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

73. Miscellaneous
( d ) Category : Sports for Deaf
ward ount Money ( in Rupees ) . Gold Silver Bronze 75 lakh 50 lakh 30 lakh
The Central Vigilance Commission ( CVC ) was formed based on the recommendations of the Committee on Prevention of Corruption , headed by K. Santhanam . VSHORADS ( Very Short Range Air Defence System ) is the name of the man portable air defence system . developed by DRDO to neutralize aerial threats . Ganga , India's first cloned cow born in March 2023 belongs to Gir cow breed . Han Kang won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2024 is a writer from South Korea . The newly inaugurated MACE ( Major Atmospheric Cherenkov Experiment ) observatory in Hanle , Ladakh , is Asia's largest and world's highest imaging Cherenkov telescope . This ground - based gamma - ray - telescope is situated at an altitude of approximately 4.3 kilometers . > Recently the government of India has approved in- clusion of some of the languages in the list of classical languages . Now , total eleven languages are having the status of classical languages . Khelo India Youth Games 2025 has been hosted by 6. Bihar .
Nanie of Event

1. Deaflympics
( e ) Category : Special Olympics – Sports
Amount of Award Money ( in Rupecs ) Gold Silver Bronze
Name of Event

1. Special Olympics ( Summer / Winter ) 5 lakh 3 lakh 1 lakh ( f ) Category : Blind Cricket World Cup
Amount of Award Money ( in Rupees )
Name of Event

1. Blind Cricket World Cup ( held in 4 years ) 5 lakh Cashaward isalso given to coaches who have trained the medal winners for at least 180 days immediately preceding the tournament . Award money to a coach is 50 % of the award money given to the sportsperson coached . In case , there is more than one coach , the award money is distributed among them equally . Scheme of Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons
According to INDIA 2024 , this Scheme was launched . in 1994. As per the Scheme , those sportspersons , who are Indian citizens and have won gold , silver and bronze medals in Olympic Games , World Cup / World Championships , Asian Games , Commonwealth Games , Para - Olympics and Para - Asian Games , have attained the age of 30 years and have retired from active sports career are eligible for pension
Indian shooters ended ISSF World Cup Final 2024 ) · Campaign with 4 medals , which includes 2 silver and 2 bronze medals . > Sweden officially joined NATO as its 32nd member on March 7 , 2024 almost 2 years after first applying to the military alliance . Gaddam Padmaja Reddy who was conferred with the
for life . Rates of pension have been doubled from April 2018. @ apna_padma Shri Award in 2022 is an Indian Kuchipudi
Enhanced rates of pension are as under :
s :
Category of Meritorius
Rate of Pension
exponent and music teacher .
Best Sportspersons
Month )
On January 29 , 1780 , Ireland - bom James Augustus : Hicky published the first edition of ' Hicky's Bengal Gazette ' , India's first newspaper . It covered a rango of issues and later came under the colonial government's radar .

1. Medalists at the Olympic Games / Para Olympic Games
20,000

2. Gold medalists at the World Cup / World
$ 16,000
Championship * in Olympic and Asian Games disciplines
Silver and Bronze medalists at the World Cup in Olympic and Asian Games disciplines Goldmedalistsofthe Asian / Commonwealth Games / Para Asian Games :
The National Education Policy , 2020 emphasizes the integration of vocational education from grade 6 onwards . Carnatic music is associated with Hinduism , the dominant religion of India . The origin of this art has been attributed to the Gods and Goddesses . Moreover , individual deities are associated with different kinds of musical instruments . India's first ever outdoor Museum " Shaheedi Park belongs to Delhi . Bhutan is the only country in the world to officially proclaim the Gross National Happiness . ( GNH ) as the measure of the country's progress . Operation Sadbhawana : As part of Operation SADBHAVANA ' , Indian Army is undertaking multiple welfare activities such as running of Army Goodwill . Schools , Infrastructure Development Projects and Education Tours etc. for the children living in remote areas of Union Territory ( UT ) of Ladakh . A total of Rs 8.82 crore of ' Operation SADBHAVANA funds have been allotted for the Union Territory . of Ladakh during FY 2022-23 . The funds are being . utilised for various activities like Human Resource / Skil Development , Sports , Healthcare , National Integration , Join on Telegram @apna_channels
.14,000
-14,000

5. Silver and Bronze medallists of the Asian / Commonwealth Games / Para Asian Games World Cup / World Championship held once in four years shall be considered . Pandit Deendayal Upadhyay National Welfare Fund • The name of National Welfare Fund for sportspersons was changed to Pandit Deendayal Upadhyay National Welfare Fund for sportspersons from 2017. This Fund was set up in 1982 with a view to assisting outstanding sportspersons of yesteryears , living in indigent circumstances who had won glory for the country in sports . The financial assistance is given to the sportsperson sustaining injury other than a fatal injury , families of sportspersons living in indigent circumstances , for medical treatment of sports persons , and forsports promoters ( referees , coaches and umpires ) living in indigent circumstances . The scheme was reviewed and revised in 2016 and amount of annual income for eligibility for financial assistance from the Fund has been raised from the existing 2 lakh to ₹ 4 lakh . ·
12,000
A A
BHARAT 2025 :

2. Memory Unit ( MU )
Any piece of information stored on a floppy diskette can be directly accessed . Magnetic tapes are long plastic tapes coated with magnetic material . Magnetic tapes can store far larger amounts of data than the floppy diskette . But a problem with magnetic tapes is that information can not be accessed directly as in the case of floppy diskettes . The third type of medium , called fixed or hard disks , are more or less similar to the floppy diskette . But one hard disk drive contains several discs of a hard material . hich speed . If yqarðirjaTelegram @apna_channels
The memory unit stores all instructions and data for the CPU . Memory Unit is an important part of the computer system . The storage device of a computer system is known as memory . Memory Unit can receive data , hold it and deliver according to the instructions from the control unit , > Memory is of two kinds : ( a ) Primary and ( b ) Secondary , ( a ) Primary Memory : It is often referred to as the working memory or the main memory of a computer system . It is capable of sending and receiving data at a very

3. Input / Output
There has to be a physical channel that permits users to supply informations to the computer . Devices that permit users to supply information to the computer are called ' input ' devices . Input unit enables us to enter ( or Input ' ) data into a computer . The common input devices are keyboard and mouse .
The two most common devices are the Visual Display Unit ( VDU ) and the printer . A Visual Display Unit ( VDU ) uses a cathode ray tube to display informations . • Torepresentany character , VDU illuminates a particular pattern of these dots . These dots are also known as pixels , a short form for picture - elements . Printers print characters on paper or other similar medium . Printers come in three popular versions : dot matrix printers , ink - jet printers and laser printers . Dot matrix printers print characters in the form of I combinations of very tiny dots . The printing head aligns its ' pins ' to match a particular pattern of dots . > Ink - jet printers spray jets of ink on to the paper to print any character . The characters are absolutely smooth as ink is sprayed in a continuous flow .
Similarly , a physical channel that permits a computer to . convey the processed information to the outside world . Devices that permit such a function are called ' output ' devices . Output unit enables the computer to show us the result and the information that we want . The common output devices are monitor , printer and speakers . Input and output devices are indispensable , but are not a part of the CPU . They are also called peripheral devices , suggesting that they lie on the periphery of the CPU . These devices are also called an interface , because they translate informations for man and machine . The most popular input device used in contemporary computers is the keyboard . Ctrl , Shift and Alt are called Modifier Keys . Another way to input information into a computer is to use an Optical Mark Reader ( OMR ) . Optical Mark Readers are capable of reading specially prepared forms . These forms have a provision for black marks to be made using a pen or a pencil in a specific position . Most competitive examinations that deal with a large number of students usually use this system . Banks use another input device called a Magnetic Ink Character Reader ( MICR ) . Special numbers are written on bank cheques using magnetic ink and in a particular style to write different number CRpasses over the words or characters ,
Laser printer , uses a laser beam to actually burn ' the characters on to the paper . We need to issue the computer a detailed sequence of instructions that it needs to follow to operate upon any data . Such a sequence is called a program . A program may directly be written to the RAM or may be stored in some form of secondary memory .
· be transferred from the secondary memory to the RAM as and when required . Execution of a program means that data is moved around in the CPU according to a well - detailed sequence by the programme ..
Join on Telegram @apna_channels

6. Lucent's Marketing , Economics & Banking 7. Lucent's Complete Mathematics 8. Lucent's SSC Higher Mathematics 9. Lucent's G.S. Prachin Bharat / Madhyakalin Bharat
ISBN 938476154-0
Lucem Publication . New Bypass Road , Ashochak Patna - 800030 , Bihar
9789384 761547
Jein on Telegram- @ @apa

